monson. maine history 1822 - 1972 history of monson, maine foreword the following data has been gathered and as sembled with as much accuracy as possible. this history could not have been compiled without the many hours of help freely given by the citizens of monson. the main sources of information for this book are listed at the back, for the convenience of the reader. may this history bring pleasure to the readers now and in the future, but especially to those with memories of the past. jeanne brown reed althea haggstrom french elizabeth emanuelson davis history of monson, maine the white house washington june 19, 1972 to the people of monson, maine the observance of your one hundred and fiftieth anniversary is an occasion of deep pride for you as well as for the nation. the high purpose and vital communityspirit that are reflected in your eventful history are in the best tradition of our american way of life. armedwith these same qualities in the years ahead, i knowthat you will strive to be in the vanguard of constructive civic accomplish ment. i welcomeyour full partnership in the demanding tasks we face as a nation, and in the good that promises to come from our united efforts. history of monson, maine kenneth m curtis may 3, 1972 citizens of monson town manager's office monson, maine dear citizens: as governor of the state of maine i want to express the best wishes of all citizens in congratulating you on the occasion of your 150th birthday. my schedule for june does not permit me to attend the celebration you have planned for june 24 to commemorate this birthday, but i want to convey my best wishes and trust that this milestone in your history will be one that leads you into a new era of prosperity for your community. history of monson, maine sesquicentennial committee names - back row, l. to r.: robert lander, linda rongner, joyce kelley, john ruksznis, joyce brown, dorcas leavitt, althea french, eloise stevens, kendrick benton. seated: elizabeth davis, aimee kugler, esther pennington, elza smith, george rongner, front row: vikki leavitt, jeanne reed. chairman: kendrick benton. co~chairman: george rongner. treasurer: elizabeth davis. general committee: r. lander, j. ruksznis, a. french, l. rongner, j. kelley, d. leavitt, v. leavitt, j. reed, e. stevens, and j. brown. united circle committee: a. kugler, e. pennington, and e. smith. history of monson, maine selectmen l. to r.: paul b. allen, frank w. nelson, worden w. smith town manager town clerk robert e. lander stanley a. robinson history of monson 1822 - 1972 early history: monson was incorporated as a town by an act of state legislature on february 8, 1822. this territory was first in the possession of massachusetts. on february 27, 1811, massachusetts granted 11,520 acres to hebron academy and on june 17, 1811, granted 11,520 acres to' monson academy. in 1820, maine became a state. april 22, 1822, was the setting of the first meeting topform a town government. the inhabitants of this town, in response to a warrant issued by samuel pingree, esq., of parkman, met at the house of whitney, hyde & co., for the purpose of completing the organization as a town by the choice of the necessary officers. this they did by choosing andrew cushman, moderator; samuel whit ney, town clerk; samuel whitney, andrew cushman and abel goodell, selectmen and assessors; lucius hyde, treasurer; austin newell, constable and col lctor; abel goodell, lucius hyde and chauncey l. colton, school committee; and filling the other offices by the choice of good and true men. the number of voters in the town at the time of its organiza tion was twenty-one, namely: amos atkinson, win. blunt, amasa chapin, calvin cushman, geo. douty, abel goodell, wm. a. hyde, lucius hyde, joseph jack son, austin newell, abiel packard, shepherd packard, asa piper, horatio sherman, isaac tyler, samuel whitney and samuel weymouth. the total population numbered ninety at that time. monson continued to run on the selectmen form of government until 1943, when they decided to elect a town manager to run the business of the town. the town manager also serves as 10 history of monson, maine tax collector, road commissioner and treasurer. the first to be elected for this office was lyle towne who held the position until 1955. to date monson has had four town managers. the first settler in this town was joseph bearce, who came from hebron in 1816. he had been here the pre vious year and felled a few trees. he commenced on lot numbered nine in the second range. during that summer, 1816, he cleared a field and built a small log house. this was the first house in town. it was situated a few rods north of the road now leading from our village to blanchard, and near where the road formerly known as the "dudley road" leaves the blanchard road. in the spring of 1818 he married nancy ricker of paris. in the autumn of the same year death claimed him for its victim. while mr. bearce lived in this town, the path from abbot to the settlement diverged from the path leading to million acres, now blanchard, and finding a pair of moosehorns, mr. b. placed them upon a post as a guide board. from that time on they served as a guide-post for the many settlers traveling on these spotted trails. in 1882, william weeks shot a moose and put its horns on the post. he painted million acres on one horn and mon son on the other horn. on aug. 25, 1914, the piscataquis historical siciety held a dedication ceremony replacing another set. several pairs were stolen over the years and some were simply demolished from the elements. in june of 1955, still another pair was mounted on the iron post. this was the sixth set of moosehorns dating from 1817 to 1955. on oct. 29, 1961, the d.a.r. tisbury m31001' chapter placed a bronze marker at the "moosehorns" to preserve the historic landmark. in 1816, geo. doughty from gray, and simeon irish, from hebron, commenced to fell trees in what has since been known as the "witham neighborhood". mr. irish built a small house that fall and moved into it in 1817. history of monson, maine 11 this was the first frame house in town, and was covered with shaved clapboards, without any boarding. it was situated on what was afterwards known as the fogg place near j. b. draper's the now abandoned moose horn to blanchard road. (the draper farm was des troyed by fire.) mr. doughty raised some crops on his land in 1817, and built a log house, into which, with a wife and five children, he moved in march, 1818. these were the first children in town. samuel rowe and wife from hebron came to monson the same year. in the fall of 1818, james stanchfield came from albion, and in february 1819, moved with his family into the house built by mr. bearce. the house he built was the first house built in the east half of monson, or on that part granted to monson academy, and the place where, for some length of time, the peope were accus tomed to meet for religious worship and for other purposes. this house was used for several years as a dwelling-house, meeting--houseand school-house. it stood on the spot where joseph daine's buildings stood in 1872. (located in the general area opposite the finn hall on rt. 15.) in the spring of 1819, joseph jackson and wife, with a family of eight children, came from no. 7, now abbot. he had been here the fall before and felled some; trees on the place occupied by david b. cotton in 1872 (now woodlands about one-half mile north of the moose horns on rt. 15). here he erected a log house and lived several years; after which he moved into the east half of the town, living on the farm occupied by h. c. pullen in 1872 (now stanwood pullen's farm). the same sea son, samuel weymouth, amos atkinson and abial pack ard came with their families and commenced making homes for themselves. mr. packard bought mr. irish's house, and mr. atkinson located on the north side of hebron pond, this was the first settlement north of the pond. 12 history of monson, maine the first birth in the town was a child born to simeon irish and wife, in the summer of 1818. the second was in the family of samuel rowe, the next summer; and the third was a son of amos atkinson, in the autumn of 1819, while they were living so far from neighbors, on the north side of the pond. a. atkinson's child died suddenly between the ages of two and three months old. in the summer of 1818, the trustees of monson acad emy sent abel goodell to explore the township, thus to be able to recommend to others to come here to find or rather to make themselves homes. in the fall of 1819, capt. amasa chapin traded with the trustees of the academy for one mile square of land, in the east half of this town, taking the same in part pay for his farm in monson, mass. (his home was built on the present site of edward kugler's farm, n. guilford road.) in may, 1820, capt. samuel whitney, justin colton and william a. hyde, with their families, and calvin colton and lucius hyde, leaving their families behind until the next winter, and royal day, austin newell and horatio sherman, single men, seventeen in all, came from monson, mass., and commenced a settlement, where the village now stands, and in the southeastern part of the town. . they left monson mass. in april. they were about three weeks on the way, and spent the sabbath, may 7th, at capt. chapin's in abbot, where they left the women and children for a few days, coming here on monday, may 8th. they stopped a few days in mr. stanchfield's house, and then went to mr. atkinson's where they found a home until they could clear away the forest sufficiently to build a house, which was soon ready for their recep tion. this house stood on the spot where h. g. sherman's house stood in 1872 (now known as louise grover's home) and was the first house in the village and the second framed house in town. it was the home of capt. whitney as long as he was a resident of this town, and history of monson, maine 13 for several years was a temporary home for quite a num ber of other families, they stopping here until they could construct some sort of house for themselves. in the winter and spring of 1822 and 1823, no less . than five families found a home in this house at the same time. these were the families of samuel whitney, james whiting, william a. hyde, lucius hyde, and this in a house twenty-two feet by thirty and unfinished. in this house, the first birth in the east half of the town, and the first in the families from massachusetts after their arrival here, occurred on the first day of january, 1821. this was a daughter to william a. hyde and wife. this child was known as mrs. catherine m. giddings of portland in 1872. in the summer of 1820, the dam was built across the outlet of the pond, thus flooding the little pond and rendering more valuable the water power. at this time, the water-power, with one mile square of land - lot no. 10 was the property of whitney, hyde and fay. in the summer and autumn of 1821, they erected a saw-mill and grist-mill. a second grist-mill was built by t'.davee, from blanchard, in the year of 1841. mr. fay never came here to live and soon after sold out his interest to frederic f. gates, who with his family, came here in the spring of 1823 to make a home. soon after this the partnership was dissolved, mr. whitney keeping the mills, mr. gates the northern and mr. hyde the southern part of their tract of land. in the spring of 1820, about three weeks after the: first emigrants from monson, mass. arrived, isaac tyler came from new gloucester and started to clear land. on march 10, 1822, he and his wife moved into his home. in february, 1822, andrew cushman and wife with a family of seven children, came from the town of ox ford. mr. c. had been here the previous year and felled trees. mr. cushman's was the fifteenth family in town. the same spring, austin newell brought his wife, whom 14 history of monson, maine he had returned to monson, mass., to marry; and with them came hiram vinton. in the spring of 1822, there also came from oxford county, cyrus packard, william bowker and cornelius barrows. zibeon packard came about the same time. abel goodell who came in 1818 to explore the township, left monson, mass, in the spring of 1821. leaving his family in harmony, he came here and cleared his farm. the next winter he moved his family as far as guilford, where they stayed one year. he was considered a resi dent in this town, voting and holding office in 1822, although his family did not arrive here until may, 1823. although there appears to have been but twenty-one voters here in april, 1822, and only twenty-five votes cast for governor in september of the same year, yet upon an old tax list of 1822 there were names of thirty two resident taxpayers. the names on that list, not already mentioned, are nathaniel bennett, reuben cush man, samuel tobin, george hathaway and isaac stone. hathaway and stone were young men employed that season by capt. chapin. the others lived here with their families and probably came in 1821 or the spring of 1822. in october, 1822, james whiting and family, five in all, came from wrentham, mass., and lived with mr. whitney and mr. atkinson, until mr. whiting could build a house, when they moved on to the place known as the whiting farm (now bessie doble's on water street). in the spring of 1823, alexander greenwood, esq., who had been employed by the trustees of hebron acad emy in 1811, to lot their portion of this township, and afterwards by monson academy to survey and lot the remainder of the town, moved from hebron and settled on the land formerly known as the watson farm (now owned by andrew sophrer of dexter) and located beyond the r. mathews' farm. in the same summer samuel robinson, zenas scales, ' abel janes and daniel wallace came and settled in this history of monson, maine 15 town. in october of the same year joseph goodell and dr. a. davison came from vermont. mr. goodell lived on the present site of lloyd ke1ley's home and orchards and mr. davison moved into dea. hyde's house, which had been built that summer. this house belonged to j. p. haynes in 1872 and was the second house built in the village. here dr. davison lived until 1825, in the sum mer of which year he built the house which is the present home of mr. and mrs. fred finley on center st. and moved into it in the autumn. sometime during this year samuel and zebedee thomas and john packard settled in the west part of town. daniel briggs also came the same year. in 1824, william connor, simeon davee, john crafts, solomon cushman, john morton and oliver eveleth, became residents of this town. in 1826, no less than nine men, most of them having families, moved into town. they were capt. j. mathews, r. k. packard, joseph barrett, roland taylor, vvarren dudley, joshua buck, david goodell, benjamin ward and john b. packard. in 1827 came joseph booth, h. g. o. harmon, george dunham, william goding and abel jewett. in 1828, abner brown, william d. hoar, milton hoar, thomas towns and solomon bray. mr. bray probably had the largest family ever living in this town, fourteen children, seven sons and seven daughters, all of whom lived to be men and women. post office: in the year 1824 or 1825, the post office in this town was established. before this, all the mail matter desig nated for this place stopped at sangerville, and the inhabitants were obliged to go twelve miles to mail or to receive a letter or paper. frederic f. gates was the first post master and hiram doughty the first mail carrier. mr. d. was succeeded, in a short time, by benjamin 16 history of monson, maine stanchfield, who every saturday for two years, went on foot to esq. kelsey's in guilford, returning in the same day, with the mail, and being obliged to cross the piscat aquis river twice each way - in the best manner he could for there was no bridge - in order to leave the mail at the post office in abbot. for this service the government paid these men two shillings a trip, or a little more than one cent for each mile of travel. they usually had some errands to do for the inhabitants, for which they received some trifling compensation. as they approached the post office, and sometimes as they passed the houses, they sounded a trumpet before them to inform the people that the mail was coming, and that there was an oppor tunity for any one who wished to send errands. in 1827, the mail was carried by deacon fuller from bangor to monson, once a week; and in 1831 mail arrived in mon-, son three times a week. after 1883 monson had mail twice daily except on weekends. on february 6, 1960, the new metro system was introduced and mail arrives at 8:00 a.m. and leaves at 5:00 p.m. daily except sundays. the postmaster was chosen according to the politi-- cal party in power to which he belonged. (note: this no longer applies as it is a civil service position.) therefore, the post office has been housed in several buildings in town: 1882, the present c. bickford home; 1889, present monson light and power co. block; 1910-1911, present t. moore block; 1912, present m. l. & p. go. block; then, present monson variety store; 1940's, moved to its present location in the t. moore block. (note: recent postmasters: alner gilbert, edward johnson, harvey gilbert, harland johnson.) erma johnson small is the present postmaster with the following part time em ployees: neola jacobson, eloise stevens, and dagmar greenleaf. history of monson, maine 17 (note of interest ---- the shed now attached to the present home of paul allen on garage st. was built on main st. after the fire of 1911. it was used temporarily as a drug store and postoffice.) first electricity in monson: on january 25, 1908, monson had its first electricity. the power was generated right here in monson by using water power from lake hebron. later, when the water couldn't generate enough power for the monson, maine slate co. to run their machines, they purchased the power from greenville which was generated at wilson pond. monson light and power co. was incorporated in december of 1907, with the monson, maine slate co. own ing all the stock. in june of 1944 francis marshall bought all the stock of the monson light and power go. from the slate co. and bought the electricity wholesale from cen tral maine power co. then in june of 1964, central maine power took over the distribution facilities in the town. first telephones in monson: there are no records to confirm this statement, but it was said that the first telephones in monson, were at the monson, maine slate co. quarry and quarry offices, and that it just "grew like topsy" from that time on. mr. fred crane was superintendent of the monson slate co. at that time, and he took over the telephone business and carried it on as a private enterprise as long as he lived, although it was never a paying proposition. the southeast monson telephone co., more commonly known as the "farmers line" was formed by the residents in the southeast part of monson and was connected to the outside through fred crane's co. the telephone busi ness was sold in 1946 to the new england telephone 18 history of monson, maine co. which established a nice telephone office in monson in the present donald keene block (now used as a barber shop) and employed several people at the time. on july 28, 1955, monson went onto the dial system at 12:01 a. m. and from that time on operators were no longer needed. at the present time, monson cannot dial direct as can many of the other cities and towns, but is in hope of being able to do so in the near future. monson free public library: january 16, 1909, seven citizens of monson peti tioned the state expressing their desire to be incorporated under the provisions of chapter 57 of the revised stat utes of 1903 and amendments and maintaining a free public library. february 4, 1909, a certificate of organi zation of the monson free public library association was filed in the office of the secretary of state at augusta, and said organization was duly notified. the first books purchased were books written by stevenson, harte, dickens and history books, numbering 90 in all. by feb. 6, 1910 the library had 636 books. in 1947, the womans club of monson appointed a committee to work with one of the state librarians discarding all outdated books. at this time, the library was completely redecor ated and the books catalogued according to the dewey decimal system. it was located at this time in what is now the monson's historical museum. on april 19, 1969, the library moved into its new home in the new municipal building in back of the town office. it contains approximately 5000 volumes. the complete interior facilities were donated by the moose head mfg. co. miss vivienne bray is the present librar ian; mrs. van wentworth and mrs. mary williams, assistant librarians. history of monson, maine 19 monson's schools the early settlers were very anxious for their child ren to be educated and the very first schools were held in private homes, this being before the town was incor porated. in 1823, a schoolhouse was erected near the center of the town. traveling conditions being very difficult, it soon became necessary to have neighborhood schools. in 1827-28, a school was built in the day district, and by 1848, there were schools in various localities. there were eight rural school houses, those being: (1) old burma school - located on blanchard road, abandoned 1906. this building no longer stands. (2) new burma school located on the blanchard road, opened in the spring of 1906. this building still stands and is privately owned and now called the wagon wheels. (3) new long dis trict school - located on the monson-guilford road. presently it is known as the finn hall used by the finnish farmers club. this one was in use in 1907. (4) north neighborhood school --located up by drake's corner, elliottsville road near esmond richards' home. this building has tumbled down. (5) vinton school house located at the corner of the williniantic and s. e. mon son roads. this building was moved to its present location across from charles strom's home in southeast monson in 1921. this is the original building and has never been used for anything but a schoolhouse. (6) red school house - located on n. guilford road below day's crossing and southeast monson road. this building is now gone. (7) barrows falls school - located between blanchard and barrows falls. this building was in use 20 history of monson, maine in 1906-07, but is now gone. (8) old long district school - located on the guilford road near ladd brook below arthur nelson's house. building now gone. monson elementary school --the first grammar school building called "old schoolhouse" was located between monson academy and the church cemetery. this building burned march 31, 1899, and was rebuilt on the present site. this school being centrally located made it possible to transport boys and girls to the village by bus. the district schools were closed by 1939. monson academy owes its birth to private enter prise. there was a group of people who were determined that the boys and girls of this little hamlet should have all the advantages of the times. this group was made up of fifty--fourcitizens who were later named as corporat ors. the corporators proved their eagerness for an in.sti tution of higher learning by subscribing $1,000.00 for the purpose of establishing an academy for the education and improvement of youth. a committee of three peti tioned the legislature for its incorporation june 14, 1847, and the act of incorporation was approved by gov. john w. dana, and can be found in chapter 62 of the acts of that year. the corporate name was "stockholders of monson academy", each subscriber holding a number of shares corresponding to his subscription. the corporators met for organization at "centre school house" in monson on sept. 4, 1847. dr. alpheus davison was chosen chairman and ephriam flint, clerk. on sept. 18, 1847 the following were chosen: lucius bradford, pres. - zenas scales, v. pres. - ephriam flint, clerk and aretus chapin, treas., with fifteen trustees. the building was erected by joseph lombard, for $935.51, the total cost including a heating system being $1,014.87. the building was dedicated aug. 28, 1848. history of monson, maine 21 the legislature granted the institution a half township, which was sold dec. 2, 1852, for $3,000.00. for several years the sum constituted the entire endowment of the academy. the original building was two stories high measuring 37 by 40 feet with the school on the ground floor and the hall above being used for a recreation room and for concerts, lectures and other public purposes. the academy had a small, well-selected library. the first session of school was held in the fall of 1848 with 106 persons in attendance. march 1860, the academy was burned to the ground. reconstruction was started immediately and the framework of this structure measuring 37 by 56 feet was still uncovered when fire again selected monson as its victim, destroying the greater part of the village.in spite of all obstacles the stalwart people of monson finished building the academy in 1860. the 1861 legislature granted monson academy one fourth of a township in aroostook county, which the trustees sold jan. 24, 1864, to george k. jewett of bangor, for $2,000.00. the in terior of the building was finished on the strength of this grant. the first session of school was held in the new academy in 1861, and continued under the direction of the trustees until 1872, when the academy united with the high school in exchange for a grant made by the town for this purpose. the academy was then governed by the trustees and the school committee. on july 1, 1892, the first floor of the academy was made into two school rooms and the high school was calcimined. on january 2, 1901, the academy was made free for the students of monson village. a on january 16, 1908, arrangements for a laboratory were made. march 16, 1922, $100.00 was spent for installing electric lights for the academy. 1 22 history of monson, maine february 27, 1924, $3,000.00 was spent remodeling the academy. the academy celebrated its one hundredth birth day in the summer of 1947. the same building was used with slight changes in remodeling the inside with up-to-date heating, lighting and plumbing facilities until 1968, when the academy consolidated with school administrative district no. 68. the academy and elementary buildings were remodeled to house the grades from kindergarten thru the sixth grade. the seventh thru twelfth grades travel by bus to dover-foxcroft to attend grammar school and foxcroft academy. a gymnasium was one of monson's big needs for a great many years. in 1940 & 1941, the monson commun ity hall fund was organized and a campaign was launch ed to raise $20,000. by august of 1941, $4,600. in cash and 50,000 feet of lumber had been donated. the plan was to have a wooden building with a slate roof. when $10,000 was on hand the building would be started. before the end of the year, vvorldwar ii disrupted all the plans. a few donations continued to come in, and the local organizations and school classes continued to make annual contributions. all organized campaigns were suspended for the next five years. a monson academy alumni association was organ ized in june of 1947. the first meeting for organization was held at the masonic hall june 13, 1947 with esther pennington acting as chairman of organization for the alumni association. at that meeting the following were chosen as officers: pres. - stanwood pullen; v.--pres. harland johnson; sec. - eloise stevens and oswald poole as treasurer. prior to this meeting the by-laws for the association were written by millard emanuelson as early as 1937. this group decided to back the gym project. there was $16,000. in the treasury, and the alumni association history of monson, maine 23 hoped to double the amount. the project was known as the monson gym fund from that time on. the steady rise in cost of materials and labor made the original type of building beyond reach. it was de cided to have a pre-fabricated type of aluminum building. the sum of $22,437.50 was needed to have an outlined building with foundation, walls and insulation. the structure was started and once more an appeal was made for subscriptions. the response was generous, but there was only enough funds to carry on work for a few months. at the town meeting on march 11, 1950, the town voted to borrow the sum of ten thousand dollars for the completion of the monson gym and the same to be paid back by the alumni association in ten notes, with each one being for a thousand dollars plus interest. the same year monthly committees were appointed to raise at least $100.00 a month. the enthusiasm with which these committees worked is a credit to any com munity. for five years there was a project every single month in this little town of less than one thousand persons and very seldom did a committee fail to raise the minimum, in many cases going way above the hund red dollar mark. in march, 1951, monson had the honor of having the late harland ladd, then state commissioner of educa tion, dedicate the new gym. the last note on the gym was paid june 13, 1955, and the note burned with fitting ceremony at the alumni banquet june 24, 1955. at one time, the seventh and eighth grades sold refreshments at recess time under the supervision of the late pete gattrell, to earn money to add to the sum of two thousand dollars to buy stage curtains, chairs, bleachers, showers and other necessities. 24 history of monson, maine history of monson, maine 25 north neighborhood school vinton distict school old burma school new burma school 26 history of monson, maine long district school monson academy and old grammar school present monson schools and gymnasium history of monson, maine 27 congregational church baptist church main street pleasant street swedish lutheran church swedish methodist church wilkins street water street 28 history of monson, maine rev. douglas p. braydon monson community church main street community church parsonage on center street (former baptist parsonage) history of monson, maine 29 monson's churches in may, 1820, a colony came from monson, mass. these were men of character and influence, men who had provided well for their families and who were de termined to maintain the same high standard in this new sparcely-settled town. on their first sunday after their arrival, they had a meeting for religious worship in the house built by mr. bearce. as far as anyone can trace, this was the first service held in monson for the purpose of worship with the exception of two funerals. arrangements were made to have religious services for the first sunday in june at mr. abiel pack:-u"d'shouse, being more centrally located for monson people and for the families who had set tled at million acres, now blanchard. the next sabbath, they met again at the same place and also organized a sabbath school. services were held here for the rest of the summer. for the next two years all worship services were held in the home of james stanchfield. by this time a schoolhouse had been built in the center of the town, and public worship was held there until a church build ing could be erected. in august, 1821, rev. john sawyer visited monson, and a congregational church was formed consisting of seven members. it was not until nov. 1824, that rev. lot ryder came to be the regular minister and was ordained in the barn of capt. s. whitney. in 1831, the first church building north of bangor was erected and was dedicated as a congregational church. this church, which was framed by r. k. packard, and was the first building framed by the square rule, was destroyed by fire in 1860, and rebuilt the following year. august 10, 1827, marked the founding of the baptist church in monson, with 14 members. the meeting house. 30 history of monson, maine was erected in 1845. during the pastorate of the rev. joseph grossa, (1918-1924) the church was remodeled, being raised two feet with a concrete sub-foundation and a back upper foundation. a furnace, the gift of mrs. brown steward, was installed in the basement and the old-fashioned pews were replaced by new ones. the old windows were replaced by lovely stained glass memo rial windows. a vestibule was built onto the front of the building with one large entrance. the belfry and steeple were raised and the church was redecorated inside and out. the baptist and congregational church began hold ing united services in 1933. church was held in the summer for six months in the baptist church, and in the congregational church in the winter of the remaining six months, with the rev. martin sorenson officiating. after 10 years of planning the two churches (baptist and congregational churches) merged their buildings into one well-designed structure on august 14, 1959, to be called the monson community church. in may, 1958, a building fund campaign was launched to finance the joining of the two churches. by late novem ber of that year the new foundation for the baptist church at the congregational church site on main street was completed and the church, minus its steeple, was on skids ready to be moved. through donations and sales during the year, the move was possible in the spring of 1959. the rev. donald f. blanchette was pastor at the time. the church members who helped to make the mer ger possible were: george (bill) wentworth, record pullen, mrs. john durham, mr. and mrs. philip knight, mrs. clifton weymouth, miss vivienne bray, mrs. arvid anderson and mr. and mrs. sherwood johnson. one year later, to the day, on august 14, 1960, the new sanctuary was dedicated. rev. william r. huber history of monson, maine 31 was minister at the time of this dedication. the lights in the steeple were given in memory of samuel pennington by mrs. esther pennington. on august 20, 1961, dr. charles gilky dedicated the pulpit in the sanctuary in memory of dr. shailer mathews. in the summer of 1960, plans were made to make the congregational church building into an educational building with three classrooms, a lounge, and restroom downstairs with an auditorium upstairs. $1,000.00 was left to the church by mrs. sarah huff. this money was the "starter" for the educational build ing. the committee borrowed $3,000.00 from the guil ford trust company and the carpenter, mr. clarence case, started the work. in march of 1961, the educational building was dedicated, and the united circle donated the lounge chairs to the church. water and rest room facilities were installed in 1962. in 1963, the final payment on the $3,000.00 note was made. in the fall of 1966, the monson community church joined with the abbot and sangerville churches and formed the s.a.m. larger parish. before this, the churches could not afford to hire a full time minister and relied on inexperienced students who could only stay for short periods of time. after forming, they were able to hire rev. douglas brayton as full time minister devoting his time equally between the three churches. the s.a.m. stands for sangerville, abbot and monson. 1971 brought the completion of the kitchen and dining room area, giving the various church and town organizations a place to hold their activities. it was about 1874-1875, that the swedish people began coming to monson, most of them working in the slate quarries. the swedish people did not understand the language of this countr_v. and wanting to worship 32 history of monson, maine god in their own tongue, they built a swedish 1viission church in 1890. some of the members of this church were lutheran, which is the state church of sweden, and some held other beliefs. there was a break in the organization, and in 1892 the swedish methodist church was built. from that time on the swedish mission church was known as the swedish lutheran church. both churches had swedish ministers and conducted their ser vices in their native tongue. there were services in these churches for many years. the saturday night church suppers which were held in the members homes were very popular. the swedish lutheran church on wil kins street was sold to the american legion in 1946 and made into a legion hall. on dec. 8, 1970 the american legion sold the hall, and it is now privately owned. the swedish methodist church was sold to the assembly of god, which is the church located on water street, and is now known as the open-door full gospel church. there were a few universalist people in town in 1884. a parish was organized, and a few services were held. a ladies circle was organized, and a fund raised which was turned over to the universalist state conven tion, held in trust for universalist work in monson. the congregational parsonage was located between the homes of charles brown and robert greenleaf on s. main st. this building is now owned by d. luce. the following is a list of the church organizations: in-active active stella grace philathea youth fellowship baptist circle united circle congregational circle margaret--listerphilathea entre nous club swedish mission circles. history of monson, maine 33 business history slate quarries: the summer of 1870 is a date that changed the pat tern of living for the inhabitants of monson. as william giffith jones was driving his horse along and gazing at the countryside, suddenly he saw slate. mr. jones, having come from wales, knew slate and its commercial value. bill bought the land from a hotel keeper and started the development of the first slate quarry in mon son within a few days. the first slate quarry was called the "eureka" which means, "we have found it". thus started the industry that was to be the main source of livelihood for monson's inhabitants for many years to come. __ the next quarry to be opened was called "hebron pond". this was operated by a mr. chapin. a year after wards it was sold to henry carter and the quarry was afterwards called "carter quarry". in 1872, the "norris quarry" opened and was op erated by mr. norris. he was the first man to install steam power. the buildings burned in 1877. 1873 - fred jackson founded the cove quarry in which the machinery of the norris quarry was installed. also that same year the "dirigo" was opened and op erated by dexter and portland companies. 1874 - forest quarry opened and operated by salem parties. 1877 - oakland quarry opened and operated by john tripp. the monson-maine quarry was in operation in 1880 by allen williams and abandoned in 1943. 1882 - kineo quarry - operated by outside parties. 1882 --burmah quarry. 34 history of monson, maine 1870-1875 --underground quarry - operated by charles folsom. 1895 - "west monson" --operated by w. m. jones. 1902 - mathews quarry - operated by mr. mathews. 1906 - portland-monson quarry. 1910 - "farm quarry" and wilkins quarry. 1919 - "eighteen quarry" - abandoned around 1922. 1922 - there were three quarries in operation - port land-monson, monson-maine slate co. and the general slate co. the coleman family, having the largest shares of stock, ran the portland-monson slate co. until april 1, 1965, when it changed hands. it's now privately owned by the tatko family. monson slate is considered the finest in the world and is particularly famous for its color, being black. monson slate is shipped all over the united states and into many foreign countries. a couple of the more noted places it can be found is on the flooring of the new monson town office. along with the black slate from monson, there is a mixture of green and red squares from new york and vermont quarries. the floor of the northeast bank of guilford, maine, also has added the beauty of monson slate to its floors. monson slate was used as the kennedy memorial stones marking the resting places of the slain president john f. kennedy and two children at the arlington national cemetery. st. patrick's cathedral in new york city also has a slate roof made from monson slate. monson railroad: in the early days transportation was by foot, horse back or a team of oxen. later came the stage from bangor to greenville. in 1871, the railroad company of bangor hired a man to survey a road from guilford to greenville. the road he surveyed would have run be history of monson, maine 35 tween the saw mill and the g.a.r. hall (now monson's historical museum), and through henry grover's orch ard (below where louise grover now lives). but soon the people found out that the railroad company had sent a surveyor to survey a road following the piscataquis river from guilford to greenville via blanchard. with this misfortune the townspeople later felt that they needed some means of transportation. in june, 1883, our little narrow gauge railroad, which was six miles long running from monson to monson jct., came into exist ance. the equipment, which was original or close to it, consisted of two engines, one combination car, 28 flat and box cars, one snowplow and one spreader. it was 'commonly known and called the"two--by-six", being two feet wide by six miles long. it can be found in some reference books that the monson railroad was 8.16 miles long when it's only 6.16 miles from monson to monson jct. however, it was necessary to add the extra two miles of tracks going through to eighteen quarry which was beyond monson-maine quarry. the first two engines number 1 and 2, 0-4-4-t were hinckleys and were built in 1882. the next two engines were numbered 3 and 4. no. 3 0-4-4-t was built by the vulcan iron works in 1912 as was no. 4 0-4-4-t which was built in 1918. the latter two were nearly identical except that no. 3 had one stirrup to lift you up into the cab whereas no. 4 had a double step. the railroad was owned by the monson-maine slate co., and its primary purpose was to haul slate from the quarry to lv.[0nson jct. it also carried passengers, mail and freight. the "peanut roaster", as we fondly called the little train, never turned around. she always backed the whole six miles from monson jct. to monson station. the narrow gauge railroad was chartered in 1882, built in 1883 and abandoned in 1945. bus service was in existance in 1955 and ceased 36 history of monson, maine functioning in 1958, operated by hasey's bus lines. the first store in town was opened in 1825, belong ing to oliver eveleth. later that same year solomon cushman opened a store. they remained the only two traders until 1830, when t. s. pullen from winthrop came to monson and started his own trade. from that time on monson's businesses have continued to grow. after the fire of 1860, mr. aretas chapin, son of one of the early settlers, constructed a hotel holding fast to all the principles of temperance. this hotel was burned in 1882. in 1886, monson had a refrigerator and butter box factory. the wooden boxes were lined with slate, the theory being that slate kept out heat and retained the cold. the project was not a success. moosehead mfg. company: after the closing of the monson, maine slate co. in 1943, a board of trade was formed by the merchants for the purpose of interesting an industry to locate in town. in 1945, the moosehead vvoodcrafter's plant in greenville was destroyed by fire. it was rumored that they did not plan to rebuild in greenville. the board of trade then met with the officials of the moosehead woodcrafters and they agreed to locate in monson for $50,000. the board of trade called a meeting of all inter ested citizens and it was decided to finance this venture by selling shares of stock. the quarry buildings were purchased, remodeled, and work was begun at once. the woodcrafters made a wooden chair with a 'seat and a back of webbing. the woodcrafters operated about a. year and a half and failed, leaving monson shareholders with nothing but worthless pieces of paper. the spirit of the founders of monson showed in this generation, and a creditors committee was formed. the stockholders history of monson, maine 37 raised twenty thousand dollars more and the plant operated for another six months, but could not keep going. the situation was really looking black when john. durham of belfast, maine, became interested in the pro ject. mr. durham had formerly been employed by diamond match co. for a number of years and as he says, his job was "putting sick factories onto their feet again". the board of trade appealed to the stockholders and ten thousand dollars was offered to john and tolford durham to take over this "sick plant". the durhams invested heavily in the plant and put long, hard days trying to straighten out a very bad situation. john durham had to learn the furniture business from the bottom up. it was "nip and tuck" for the first three years; then things began to look brighter. in 1954, the moosehead manufacturing company was able to pay a dividend to their stockholders. on october 29, 1959, moosehead mfg. purchased an abandoned woolen mill in dover-foxcroft to extend the production of their beautiful furniture and opened for business in 1960. both plants today have roughly 200 employees. the company has sales offices in new york city, los angeles, chicago, and san francisco with show rooms in new york and north carolina. tables and chairs are the monson plant's major production, while the dover-foxcroft plant manufac tures upholstered and bed room furniture. 1972 monson businesses with their early history and former owners milton bartlett's gulf station - the land and buildings owned by french & curtis - they bought the land from arthur bessey in 1956. the first manager john ruksznis followed by ronald clukey, maurice 38 history of monson, maine davis, frank templeton and in 1967, it was opened by its present operator - milton bartlett. yankee trader - the present building was built for daniel champion in 1935 by percy smith and was then known as champion's filling station. it was later acquired by arthur and edna c. haggstrom and in turn sold to alanson robbins in 1971. monson garage - the bottom story of the now john ruksznis home was previously located on main st. between a. haggstrom and d. williams houses. at that time the building which is now monson garage was a barn situated in back of this house. after it was moved, it was used as a livery stable by p. w. knight and then as a leased garage. former business owners were: archie>> greenleaf and stanley stevens; archie greenleaf; dan iel champion; will champion (operated by leslie robinson) ; edward dutra; lloyd butterfield; hal stanchfield. the present owner, john ruksznis has been in business for 26 years. storer's home care center - this was a hardware store owned by billy eldridge and later by luther colbath. it was then bought by john strom, then by sam ulman and used as a meat store. the american. legion bought it from ulman and they in turn sold it to ira bishop. next arnold grant owned it and he sold out to the present owner, berwin storer. (note: the civil defense had a lookout tower built on top of this building during world vvarii to report airplanes that passed the area.) j & j general store - attorney john sprague's house stood here before the 1910 fire. it was rebuilt by arthur brown and made into a general store. it was then taken over by clarence brown. the block was sold to the following people in the proper sequence: ethel & arvid holmquist, paul hoyle, laurice goodwin, joseph & history of monson, maine 39 james quartararo and the present owners, c. leavitt and james quartararo. (rent upstairs.) monson light and power building - in 1889, c. w. folsom had a drug store on one side of the building, and a post office was on the other side. roy hescock had the drugstore - post office when the build ing burned in the 1910 fire. in 1912, it was rebuilt by alner gilbert. since that time it has been used as a variety store, a&p store, grocery store and post office. the annex was used as a garage. it is now owned by francis g. marshall as an office and storage. rents upstairs - vacant. poole's market - former owners - ladd, w. a. bray, arthur bray, nadeau. oswald poole bought it from nadeau. it has always been a grocery store. it was dam aged by fire in 1955 when nadeau owned it. rent in back was gutted by the fire and was removed. rent upstairs vacant. masonic block - burned in 1911. arthur brown had a store on the street level and a house owned by him was located out back of the masonic hall. a stable was underneath which also burned. rebuilt. the first floor housed two businesses. one side was a hardware store with the following proprietors: bill eldridge, george pul len, and gordon hall. the other side has been used as a restaurant, office and dress shop. second floor - banquet room, dentist and doctor's offices, barber and beauty shops and club rooms. third floor - the main hall was used by the masons, odd fellows, rebekahs and star. the building was damaged by fire july 12, 1969, and is now vacant. the present owner of the building is edward adams. monson variety store - the fire of 1911 started in this building. at this time sam hughes had a clothing store and barber shop housed here. the rent upstairs was occupied by storer flint who died in the fire. a 40 history of monson, maine bowling alley was in operation in the basement. the building was rebuilt by henry grover for edward john son and was used as a grocery store then a post office. rent upstairs remodeled. purchased by evold jorgensen about 1944-45 and is now owned and run by madeline j orgensen. terris moore block - alner gilbert sold the building, which presently houses the post office and coffee shoppe restaurant, to roy hescock after the 1910 fire. r. hescock had a drugstore and post office there>> which burned in 1911. r. hescock rebuilt in. the same spot, and housed a drug store on one side with a barber shop on the other side of the building. hescock then sold it to aubrey williams who ran a drugstore with a post office in operation on the other side at that time. the building is presently owned by terris moore, who lives in the upstairs apartment. blue goose - owned and operated by joe davi son as undertaking parlor. burned in 1911 - rebuilt and used as undertaking parlor. it was then used as a feed store by guy hammond - danny guilds then had an antique store called the blue goose. it now belongs to edward adams who uses it for storage. vainio building - this building belonged to jesse rogers then harry daw. h. daw had a grocery store. rent upstairs. this building burned in the 1911 fire. rebuilt. after daw died harry hughes had a gro cery store - then austin robinson --grocery - store vacant. galen vainio now owns the building which he bought in december 1969 and is his residence. donald keene building - built after 1897 fire. owned by orrin rice, and used as a barber shop and dwelling. then sold to d. keene who had a barber shop one side of the building with a bakery, that now houses history of monson, maine 41 dr. isaac nelson's office on the other side. rent upstairs -- vacant. (note: the telephone office was once housed here when operators were employed.) monson laundramat - this building belonged to coombs & johnson between 1883 and 1885 and it burned in 1897. henry grover owned it about 60 years. ago and used it as a country store. h. grover's son, merton grover then ran a bakery and later opened a saloon. louise grover sold to humphrey in 1963. humph rey in turn sold out to laurice goodwin who is the present owner. rent upstairs. knights store - 1888 bought by p. w. knight from c. s. pullen & co. and was known as p. w. knight & sons (amos & henry). it was always used as a dry goods and clothing store. rent upstairs is presently occupied by katherine knight. store is closed. town hall (gar building) - first building built after the civil war. destroyed in the fire of decem ber 28, 1888. rebuilt. the annex built in the 1930's by w.p.a. men. the gar turned the building over to the town of monson in the early 1940's. when the town owned it they housed the town office, fire dept. and public library on the first floor. second floor - was used for many activities. in 1972, the town deeded it to the: tisbury manor chapter d.a.r. and it presently houses monson's historical museum. (note: in 1889 the town meeting hall was located in [tarr] spencer's hall.) waymouth's garage - located on road to greenville. built by dennis weeks for arthur day in the late 1920's. arthur day owned and operated it until 1942. closed from 1942-45. reopened by a. day and run for a short time then sold to earl waymouth in late 1940's who operated it as a garage. business closed by waymouth in 1971. 42 history of monson, maine daigle & daigle - built by patrick and jerry daigle. opened in the summer of 1970. hardware and lumber goods. located on rt. 15. monson spring water co. - this was origin ally started by a. w. chapin for his own use who was then the owner of the building which presently houses brown's nursing home. will bray bought the water company from percy smith on dec. 4, 1925. w. bray then to maude bray on oct. 8, 1945. m. bray in turn sold it to elwin & marguerite french on oct. 25, 1948. on april 8, 1955, e. french sold his half to esmond rich ardson. e. richardson & m. french sold out to thaxter jones on june 20, 1962. in july of 1968 a town meeting was held and it was voted to buy the water company for $6,000. on oct. 1, 1968, the town of monson took over the water co. from thaxter jones. the town owns the company at the present time. c. v. (tad) turner, inc. - forest products and general trucking, bulldozing, shovel, back-hoe, crane work, and excavating. located on the william hughes farm on the willimantic road. insurance: francis g. marshal --hartford insurance co. and monson light and power co. robert e. lander --general insurance stanley a. robinson - insurance and real estate broker forest products: merton carr - woods operator bjork bros. --william and harlan - woods operators robert brown - pulp buyer wayne reed - pulp and logs hollis nelson --woods operator lloyd kelley - building camp roads and backhoe work kelley bros. --apple orchards c. v. tad turner - forest products and contractor history of monson, maine 43 beauticians: me me's beauty salon - amelia daigle, prop. jo l's toppe knott shop - joyce lander, prop. miscellaneous: phyllis ruksznis - bakery raymond anderson - painter (buildings) berwin storer - painter (buildings) dennis casey ~ "wildwood camp ground" monson pond herbert bishop - snowmobile dealer - bishop's great out doors joyce kelley - antiques brown's nursing home - raymond bishop, prop. french's boarding home - marguerite french robert l. greenleaf - electrician robert leavitt - electric motors olive hammond - seamstress leon piela - carpenter lawrence hammond - bookkeeper william erickson - crawlers (bait) earl waymouth - live bait ed and audrey higgins - live bait kendrick benton - photographer gerry weymouth --artist and teacher elinor brayton - artist mrs. elizabeth seitz - the shell studio coffee shoppe kahvila - helen johnson, prop. bessie doble - antiques patrick & jerry daigle - carpenters edna haggstrom - knits and crochets articles for sale harry lindie - radio repair f. elwin french - repair shop and makes novelties two active farms: john sandberg - southeast monson forrest stevens - (old steward farm) southeast monson 44 history of monson, maine history of monson, maine 45 . _ aim . >:>>eur'x> na. '#3' monson, maine slate co. (old photo) moosehead manufacturing company - 1972 formerly the monson, maine slate co. 48 history of monson, maine products manufactured by moosehead mfg. co. kennedy marker came from portland-monson slate co. history of monson, maine 49 m. r. r. no. 3 engine at monson station on water street m. r. r. no. 4 engine - engineers: albion johnson & elwin french 50 history of monson, maine c'hampion's filling station - now yankee trader built in 1935 monson garage in 1923 arthur haggstrom and archie greenleaf present owner - j. ruksznis history of monson, maine 51 main street looking south (old photo) r. - l.: masonic block, g. vainio's, restaurant and post office, _e. adams, former a. anderson's, d. keene, laundramat, and knight's. main street looking north (old photo) 52 history of monson, maine main street looking south (0121photo) j. 8; j. general store, manson light & powcr co, masonic block, etc. poole's market history of monson, maine 53 g.a r. hall - taken before former american legion hall annex built in 1930. with civil defense tower. taken in early 1940's. present storer's home care center. g. a. r. hall, then town hall, present d. a. r. building. 54 history of monson, maine 1972 --main street looking north 1972 --main street looking south history of monson, maine 55 new municipal building on february 14, 1968, the town approved an earlier proposal of building a new municipal building to house the monson town office, library, fire department, highway dept. and youth activities room. ground was broken in april of 1968 for the new building which was designed by dan edgerton at the site of the former willer hotel. the cost of the new building was $39,200. on june 16, 1969, open house was held dedicating the new addition to t.he town. fire department history prior to the organization of the monson volunteer fire department, the town had no fire fighting equip ment and depended on the help of the townspeople. in 1877, alvin gray, who was the selectman, bought "an engine, and an old hand tub and some hose for $400 which the town appropriated for that use. at that time much was said against the purchase until the fire of 1897 which burned the buildings from the canal to knight's store. this section was rebuilt as follows from knight's store to the canal - grover's now the laundramat owned by laurice goodwin - orrin rice - now donald keene block - e. mclver --last known as arvid anderson's store which was demolished in 1966 - j. davison - now edward adams and used for storage. the first fire apparatus is now in a museum in meredith, new hampshire. the monson fire department was organized in 1937, with dennis weeks as chief, and sixteen members who were arthur day, merton grover, clair sargent, stanley stevens, cliff simpson, henry knight, erick erickson, arthur haggstrom, fred berry, anselm swanson, paul jackson, guy hammond, thomas mountain, elwin french, robert benton and eugene bickford. 56 history of monson, maine the first fire house was in the old gar hall known as the old town hall on main street and remained there until 1968 when the new municipal building was built. in 1937, the first motor driven fire engine was pur chased which is still being used today. the department presently has two fire engines, two tank trucks and an army surplus truck. an alarm system was installed on the top of the old town hall building. prior to this the church bells were used as a means of an alarm. on may 3, 1946, arthur haggstrom became fire chief, a post he>> held until march 28, 1961, when john ruksznis became chief and who holds this office at the present time. the fire department now consists of 20 men who attend regular meetings and training sessions. monson has been the victim of many fires over the years. in may, 1824, a fire which started on what is now the common, where the forest was being cleared away, threatened to destroy what buildings there were in the vicinity. all the help that could be found worked hard for a day and night to save the mills, two houses and one or two outbuildings then standing where the village; is now. then another fire struck the town in the autumn of 1825. this fire swept across a large portion of this state destroying great tracts of timber land. many of the build ings were in danger, but through strenuous efforts, none were destroyed. again in the spring of 1831, the village was threat ened once more. the great fire (taken from the 1914 pharetra) it is quite a look backward over the nearly fifty-four years since the great fire in monson. within this period monson has been visited by a number of serious confla grations but none of them has destroyed so large a history of monson, maine 57 proportion of the buildings as that on may 27, 1860, which swept away most of the village. few who were then of adult age are now living, and those who were: then chidren are well along in years. prior to 1860, monson enjoyed a remarkable ex emption from serious fires. the town in common with others suffered from the great forest fires of 1825, but from 1818 to 1860, according to reverend charles davi son's semi--centennialaddress, only four dwelling houses had been destroyed by fire; namely, that of samuel rowe in the winter of 1818-19, that of calvin colton in the spring of 1823, that of george doughty in 1836 and that of alexander greenwood houston in november, 1852. for seven years after this last fire the sound of the fire bell had not been heard. its silence was first broken march 31, 1860, when the academy burned, to be fol lowed by a greater conflagration not quite two months later. in may, 1860, the weather had been for several weeks warm and dry. there were no slated roofs in monson then and the shingles on the roofs were dry as tinder. sunday, may 27, was a calm and pleasant day with a light south wind. shortly after the close of the morning services the sabbath stillness was broken by the wild cry of "fire" and the ringing of the bell in the congregational church. looking across the little pond from the window of my father's house, then standing on the site now occupied by i. p. wing's residence (now the home of edwin holm bom's), i saw the flames pouring from the roof of the>> stable connected with nelson savage's hotel called the "mansion house", the hotel being on the site now occu pied by peleg w. knight's store, and the stable a little south and in the rear. in the few minutes required to reach the spot, the flames had spread to the hotel and the inmates were throwing, out of doors and windows, 58 history of monson, maine beds, bedding and furniture in frantic effort to save something from the wreck. the heat generated an active air current and the flames with a wild roar devoured everything they touched in an incredibly short time. the burnin.g shingles were swept high in the air and were carried by the now accelerated south wind northward, immediately setting fire to any roof on which they dropped. the flames mocked the puny efforts to stay their onward rush with water pails and buckets - the only fire-fighting apparatus in the village. it was a spectacle at once grand and awful to see almost the entire village in flames at once. the fire began about one p. m. or a little earlier and by three p. m. the work of destruction was substantially complete. when the sun set on that eventful day, little was left in the central part of the village but a mass of smoking ruins. except a small shop next north of the canal, every building on the west side of main street from the man sion hotel north was destroyed. this included tarr's and knight's blacksmith shops. tenney's wheelwright shop, j. h. pullen's store and home of deacon "ward on the lot afterwards of a. s. garland (now gordon hal1's home). the fire also destroyed a cabinet shop of elias t. andrews and dwelling of albion jackson, both on pleasant street the latter on the site of mrs. hattie crafts' residence (now known as esther pennington's home). only a change of wind prevented the flames. from sweeping up church street. on the east side of main street every building north of the canal to and including the congregational church was burned, in cluding aretas chapin's extensive farm. buildings, oliver eveleth's store (now erma smal1's home) and dwelling occupied by a. g. houston (former d. a. r. chapter house) and the hotel called the "monson house" (located in the general area of berwin storer's home) then kept by solomon j. chandler. (note: aretas history of monson, maine 59 chapin's farm was about where louise grover's home now stands.) in the midst of the excitement a dwelling house on central street formerly occupied by honorable j. h. rice on the lot afterwards of a. f. jackson (now the home of edward laverty which was formerly owned by ansel lapointe), caught fire from the flying embers and was speedily burned to the ground. in the space of two hours, about forty buildings were totally destroyed with a large portion of their contents. so rapidly did the>> flames spread that there was little opportunity to save. anything. the buildings destroyed included one church, two hotels, three of the four stores, six dwellings be sides shops, one law office, barns and outbuildings. the business part of the village was practically wiped out. some of the sufferers were stripped of substantially all their earthly possessions. some had no insurance and others while less unfortunate never recovered from their losses. to crown all, certain disreputable characters from outside added plunder to the troubles of the suf ferers. the total losses were estimated at $22,750 and in surance only $9,600. at the scale of prices prevailing this meant much more than the same figures would represent today and gives a very imperfect idea of the magnitude of the misfortune which for the moment over whelmed the little village. the heaviest losers were nelson savage, $1,300; j. h. pullen, $2,800; congrega tional society, $1,200; with no insurance; solomon j. chandler, $3,000; oliver eveleth, $2,200; and aretas chapin, $8,000. the figures are those given in the ob server at the time, and those losses except in the case of the church were partially covered by insurance. the business men sought such accomodations as they could find. the post office was for some time kept in the rear wing of horace flanders' house (now tolford 60 history of monson, maine durham's). some who had been in business at monson sought other fields of activity. it was many years before the village regained its former prosperity. the cause of the fire was never certainly known. one rumor attributed it to certain half intoxicated per sons smoking in the hay loft of nelson savage's stable. others believed that the fire was deliberately set by an offender who had been arrested in monson shortly before and who threatened vengeance upon the town. no attempt was made however (perhaps from lack of evidence) to bring the culprit, if such he was, to justice. incidentally the fire resulted in one important bene fit in ridding monson (let us hope forever) from hotels in which intoxicating liquor was kept for sale. shortly after the fire aretas chapin opened a hotel (built on the site of the now bartlett's gulf station), which until it burned on march 25, 1882, maintained a consistent and honorable record as a temperance hotel, and this excel lent record has, i believe been maintained by hotels since opened in monson. dudley p. bailey the alarm of fire rang at 4 a. in. on friday the 28th of december of 1888. the engine house with the g.a.r hall above, the building owned by hilman bros. and used as a furniture and tailor's shop, and mr. boynton's fine new buildings, store and dwelling with barn adjoining and a dry house filled with lumber belonging to the mon son refrigerator co. were swept away in an hour's time. it was the most disasterous fire since 1860. the town lost the road machine for which it paid $225.00 just two years before. the buildings burnt nearly together and almost everything in them was destroyed. the hearse was saved. (note: this is the fire which burned from water street to the residence of alvin gray's - now a. > located where brown's nursing home now stands. on feb. 7, 1955, poole's market, then owned by nadeau, was damaged inside by fire. the interior of the masonic hall which housed pul len's hardware and robinson insurance agency on the first floor, burned july 12, 1969. organizations american legion post no. 116 and auxiliary towne--holmbom post no. 116 the monson american legion was started on may 1, 1921 with 16 charter members: ira f. bishop, august peterson, byron a. kallgren, frank a. larson, william lindie, thomas mountain, lawrence johnson, paul nel son, elmer lindie, erick holmquist, robert bigger, and byron w. harmon. ira bishop was the first commander, and in later years, served as county commander. the auxiliary was instituted on dec. 12, 1922., with 38 charter members: lizzie towne, mary davis, mary larson, edith carlson, lottie grant, margaret bigger, elizabeth leclair, elizabeth bodge, margaret steward, myrtle homer, florence hughes, addie wing, pearl dore, ruth larson, edith brown, nettie kallgren, mar garet bishop, margaret leclair, isabella brown, amy kronholm, hilma holmquist, marjorie hughes, sadie grover, audrey flint, jennie lindahl, ida roberts, esther johnson pennington, madeline leclair, marion billings, rubena johnson fenlason, blanche i-lescock, whilhelmina stanchfield, estelle lindie, harriet flint, hattie larson, judith natycks venott, alice jackson, and laurice harmon. ' history of monson, maine 63 the monson post was named in honor of oral a. towne, who was killed in action july 22, 1918 in bois lefere, france. on september 24, 1951, the american legion of monson voted to change the name to towne holmbom post no. 116 in honor of oral a. towne and lawrence holmbom. the latter died in england during world war ii. for many years, both the monson american legion and the auxiliary held their meetings in what is now storer's home care center. there, they held many food sales and card parties to raise money and provide relax ation for their members. in 1925, they erected the flag pole that stands in the square. in 1946 the american legion bought the swedish lutheran church and held their meetings and activities there until dec. 8, 1970, when they sold the hall and became inactive. previous to this they held their fairs, suppers, and dances at this location. each year they held a field day in by monson pond which consisted of base ball games, skeet shooting, swim races, potato bag races, etc. they also sold hot dogs at this annual event. each year, past and present, the american legion and auxiliary have participated in the memorial day exercises. the american legion auxiliary unit no. 116 is still active. daughters of the american revolution tisbury manor chapter, d. a. r. the tisbury manor chapter, d. a. r. was organized nov. 5, 1952, with 19 charter members: elena j. quillian, genevieve j. beckwith, gwendolyn m. allen, beatrix j. bray, stella p. hughes, edith d. jackson, grace j. jackson, faye d. mithee, agrandece r. pullen, pricilla c. robinson, hazel p. warran, josephine s. emanuelson, eloise s. stevens, ada b. wyman, ivy p. leighton, bern 64 history of monson, maine ice j. young, june j. mcdonnell, melvina d. jacobson and marie s. pullen. the first event of the monson d. a. r., was placing a marker on the grave in the church cemetery of lydia oldham jackson, widow of revolutionary patriot barna bas jackson, on aug. 29, 1954. they also placed a slate marker on the grave site of alexander greenwood, sur veyor of the town of monson and surrounding areas, in the church cemetery on june 30, 1961. a small museum in the old town hall (g. a. r. hall) was established on aug. 21, 1955. plans are being made to re-establish in this building this year it having been at the chapter's gray house since 1959. (note: the museum opened officially on june 24, 1972.) the monson chapter also sponsored the j. a. c. clubs, d. a. r. good citizen girls and the american history essay contests in the monson schools until it's consolidation into s. a. d. no. 68. in 1959, they acquired the title to the gray house which was bequeathed to the chapter by genevieve jackson beckwith and maintained it until this year when the town of monson deeded the old town hall building to them for the museum. other *past and present organizations "gerryarelief corp. no. 38 american sunshine club j. e. club *sons of veterans *men's club >>woman's club *woodman's lodge *loon club w ct u history of monson, maine 65 *monson doric lodge no. 149 *onaway lodge no. 106 i.0.0.f. *north star rebekah no. 38 *euclid chapter no. 58 o.e.s. finnish farmers club *g.a.r. gerry post no. 5 *p. of h. juanita grange *farm bureau (both men and women) formed in 1919 youth groups boy scouts girl scouts youth recreation club troop no. 119 4-h club (started about 1927) monson citizens dedicate honor roll \ (taken from the piscataquis observer dated aug. 3, 1944 written by earle jackson) sunday, july 30th, 1944, will go down among the outstanding days in the history of the town of monson. the occasions was the unveiling, presentation and accept ance of the honor roll erected to honor those in the armed forces in world war i and world war ii from this town. the site of the honor roll is on the vacant lot owned by doric lodge, f. & a. m. between masonic hall and the p0st--office.early in the day a group of townspeople' took it upon themselves to give main street, through the business section a good cleaning. this done, main street looked spic and span. the residence of w. harry hughes being directly across the street and opposite the honor roll, made a fine place to carry out the prepared program. the veran da at the hughes residence was prettily decorated with 66 history of monson, maine baskets of flowers and served as a platform for those taking part in the ceremonies. a loudspeaker system was installed so all could hear throughout the business section. long before the hour set for the dedication exer cises, two oclock, p. m., people began to gather and autos took available parking space. arthur l. bray very efficiently presided. monson band was assembled on the spacious lawn in front of the hughes home. very soon after 2 o'clock, mr. bray announced the opening of the program, a selection by the band. prayer was offered by rev. joseph griffiths, pastor of the methodist church in guilford. the honor roll was un veiled and god bless america sung by the all male chorus - fred m. hescock, paul a. jackson, guy 0. hammond, george p. pullen, w. w. pullen, robert i. roberts of dover-foxcroft, and audience. mr. bray next read the names on the honor roll and as the gold star names were read, five in number, three in world war i and two in world war ii, beautiful bas kets of flowers were placed in front of the honor roll by five girls - lucinda forbus, janet bjork, carolyn desano, evelyn simmons and doris nelson in memory of the boys who have made the supreme sacrifice. this was followed by the playing of the star spangled banner by the band. mr. bray introduced the guest speaker of the after noon, captain brower l. pernet of the air force, dow field, bangor, maine. captain pernet expressed his great pleasure at being prsent at this occasion and comp limented the people of monson for their deep interest in erecting such a beautiful honor roll. after another selection by the band, chief dennis c. weeks of the monson fire department, sponsors of the honor roll, presented it to the town and it was accepted by lyle c. towne, chairman of the board of selectmen of the town of monson. the band played several more selections and rev. griffiths pronounced the benediction. history of monson, maine 67 the honor roll the plot of ground where the honor roll stands had been previously leveled and seeded and is now covered with green grass. iron posts set in cement support the tablet which is seven feet wide and eight feet high. the frame is of wood painted white, on either side a raised victory v adorns the top with u. s. a. perpendicularly arranged below and the letters also raised, these emblems being painted in gold color. the panels enclosed in the frame are of slate, the top bears the inscription - monson honor roll --on a field that has been sand-blasted. the main panel is of slate 48 x 60 inches, in the upper section the names of world war i veterans, 58 in number appear and in the lower section those of world war ii, 109 at the present time. the names are in bronze and fastened to the slate back ground. plate glass covers the entire main panel. much credit is due to the members of the monson fire dept. for their untiring effort and hours of work to complete this beautiful honor roll. surrender of japan celebrated in monson (taken from the piscataquis observer, aug. 23, 1945, written by earle jackson) elaborate programs carried out tues. and wed. nights -- the citizens of this quiet little town, nestled among the beautiful hills and mountains of piscataquis county, were on the alert tues. evening, august 14th, as they have been for the past 4 or 5 years, for the welcome news all have been longing to hear - the end of the war. early evening broadcasts announced that at 7 o'clock important news would be given out and it is safe to say that every radio was tuned in to get that announcement. 68 history of monson, maine it came as scheduled and the townspeople let loose the joy in their hearts in their own individual ways. the fire siren blew for a full 15 minutes, it sounded sweet to the ear, much sweeter than in the dead hours of night for a fire. automobile horns took up the refrain throughout the town and in the distance the powerful portland-monson slate co. whistle echoed back. the peal of the church bells added to the noise. monson band quickly assembled in front of the town hall and dispensed stirring music until darkness covered their music. an impromptu parade of happy mothers, wives, sisters and sweethearts, as well as many children, grabbing anything they could make a. noise upon, pa raded back and forth on main street and the band played on. at times the whistles, horns and noise of the paraders nearly drowned out the band. later during the evening several cannon shots reminded the inhabitants that the war was ended. the american legion opened their hall and free dancing was enjoyed for several hours, music furnished by frank hughes, alvin cowan, orman kron holm and archie johnson. for several days previous, this momentous moment had been anticipated and a group of business men had gathered to quickly formulate a plan for celebrating the glad news, if and when it came. the final arrangements were left with george p. pullen, president of the local board of trade, and prominent hardware dealer and eugene e. bickford, the local efficient electrician. wednesday, august 15th was monson's big day and the history of the town will record it as a most outstand ing. an overcast sky dashed the hopes of early risers but in the early forenoon this burned away and the remain der of the day was most beautiful. a church service opened the day's program at 8:30 o'clock conducted by rev. ruth jackson, pastor of the united church and held in the baptist church which was history of monson, maine 69 filled with people who attended to give thanks for a victorious end to this most terrible war of all time. appropriate hymns were sung, mrs. george p. pullen, organist. scripture reading, mrs. jackson. the speaker of the service was rev. george flower, pastor of the> evening having a drama at tarr's hall. on april 22, 1890, the band gave a concert in which they were assisted by the late miss mammie bush of foxcroft, whose whistling solos were a feature. on july 4, 1892, the band furnished music at the opening of the milo driving park, and as the bass section was a little light at this time, the late h. g. pratt of foxcroft was hired for this job, and he aided much in making it a success. up to this time,>>the band had been purely a brass band, but now clarinets were added, which was a great history of monson, maine 87 help to the organization both as regards to tone and effic iency, as they were now able to take up music, before they were prevented from touching for lack of a reed section. about this time the word "cornet" was dropped from the name, and the organization has since been known as the monson band. in november, 1892, arrangements were made with prof. w. s. ripley of boston, to come and give the band lessons for a week, and he gave the first lesson on nov. 7th. every member was present each night, and such good work was done that on the next monday evening a concert was given under the direction of prof. ripley from which enough was realized to pay for the lessons, and the band was much benefited by this work. on june 28, 1893, the band accompanied gerry post g.a.r. to abbot, the occasion being the dedication of the soldiers' monument. on oct. 21st, they accompanied the same ..organization to foxcroft for the purpose of dedicating a soldiers' monument at that place. on june 13, 1903, a set of new uniforms were purchased from the cincinnati regalia co., cincinnati, ohio. these were dark blue, trimmed with black mohair braid. july 15, 1904, the band accompanied onaway lodge to guilford on the occasion of the dedication of the odd fellows' hall. in all these years there have been but a few players who have come in from other places, and all additions had to be made from new material, started at the beginn ing, and worked up. the spring of 1905, brought a player of unusual ability. knut felix ohman, who was finnish, and a baratone player equal to any in new england. having played for many years in the old country, his work on this beautiful instrument was a marvel to all. with his help the band was able to handle a much higher grade of music, and they soon became known as a concert band of much ability. mr. ohman remained with the band about a year and a half. the band attended the grand 88 history of monson, maine carnival at dover, aug. 22, 1908, at which there were ten bands present. one of the features was the render ing of several numbers by a consolidated band of 209 players. on sept. 9, 1910, the band attended the band carni val at penobscot park where nine bands were present. may 9, 1911, a new set of uniforms were bought. these were the regulation a. f. and m. uniform, and up to date in every particular. may 12, 1911, the band gave its concert and dance, with a good program, and the full band furnished the music for dancing. october 1, 1912, in company with three other bands, they furnished music for the centennial parade and celebration of the town of foxcroft. the band played at every decoration day at monson since it was organized, and for several years for the memorial services of frater nal orders in june. there were many changes in the membership of the band over all the years, and in 1912, the director was the only one of the original members that remained. at the close of the season of 1912, the following made up the band! earle h. jackson, frank wentworth, levi flint, arthur fogg, j. h. gilbert, w. c. jackson, g. l. brown, harold campbell, j. r. flint, l. a. thomas, fred stanchfield, austin brown, frank hughes, carroll l. jackson, fred w. elliott, w. w. pullen, e. w. farrar, a. l. farrar, h. w. wing, malcolm dane with w. c. jackson as director. the band was under the direction of walter c. jackson for 34 years. w. c. jackson's father taught him to read music, and as there was no one nearer than dover to instruct him, he taught himself. he was chosen leader because he could play a little, and the others could not, as he quaintly expressed it. each winter he taught between 10-20 pupils, each on different instruments. history of monson, maine 89 afterthe deathof jacksonin januaryof 1922, the following directed the band: carroll jackson, frank m. larson, paul nelson, paul jackson, and earle h. jackson. from 1920 until its disbandment, the following are those members who participated in the monson band: (note: dates of memberships were unavailable and we apologize for those names that have been excluded through lack of information and unavailable records.) frank larson felix mattson max forbus harvey gilbert evold j orgensen francis marshall earle jackson roland jacobson frank wentworth thayer smith carroll jackson fred stanchfield frank hughes bill jacobson austin brown paul nelson anselm swanson oscar nelson milton stanchfield frank nelson elmer lindie sam ulman walter steward merton grover arthur bjork byron kallgren harry wing grace nelson nace leroy jacobson junior larson robert zimmerman lawrence hammond ernest farrar kenneth simpson oscar ulman alex stromback arthur farrar fred elliot maurice lebree donald davis thor stromback swen nelson millard lord elwood lord lawrence gilbert horace gilbert pauline gilbert-mattson merle finley edward gilbert harold french therese "patsy" nelson johnson flag bearers - althea french, carlene b. bickford, marion j. sandy (for the years 1943, 44, 45) in the 1940's, the monson band traveled to guilford and abbot to play and march for their memorial day celebration. the last uniforms were bought in the late 1930's. a bandstand was built about 1930 by the l\/ionson band under the direction of frank bray, on the lot which was then owned by fred crane and where lake hebron hotel once stood (the lot which is now between john and 90 history of monson, maine james durham's present homes). the lumber was do nated by george pullen and other townspeople donated time, labor, and other needed materials. arthur l. brown gave the address at the dedication ceremony. on june 21, 1944, it was moved to its present location in front of the academy building. band concerts were held every thursday night in the bandstand. around 1950, one of monson's most enjoyable assets was brought to an end. many of the instruments were donated to monson academy for use in school activities. monson academy's state championship basketball teams monson has been the home of some of the flnest basketball teams in the state. three monson academy basketball teams proved themselves by winning the state championship titles in 1909, 1932, and 1968. in 1909, the monson academy five were: elmer bigger, howard sanborn, george pullen, merton gro ver, merton sears, with edward johnson as their coach. in 1932, monson academy was victorious over washington academy with the score 37-26. that year the team was made up of the following line-up: oscar suomi (captain), oswald (cookie) poole, millard eman uelson (ollie), stanford stromback, earl brasier, philip soderquist, george carlson, forrest stevens (mike), george (savve) larson was their coach. harold e. car son was principal of monson academy at that time. in 1968, the monson academy slaters once again took the title which was the last ever to represent mon son academy as an entity. the varsity team won over the casco "loggers" at the exposition building in port land with a score of 64-57. those responsible for the history of monson, maine 91 great showing were roy taylor (captain), cyril (bud) leavitt, richard (dick) woodard (co-captain), greg ory lander, stuart anderson, jeffrey greenleaf, steven bray, edward kronholm, with gary webb as their coach. douglas nelson and ronald harris were managers. craig anderson and james crockett were on the varsity squad the first half of the year. march 9, 1968 was the big day for the slaters. that night the townspeople gave a victory homecoming reception for the team. the bus was met at the abbot monson town line by a cavalcade of cars, sirens, police, and fire engines which escorted them to the gymnasium. the main street and school yard were both lined with lighted torches. a small program followed with speeches by principal antonio paradis, coach gary webb, and rev. douglas brayton. refreshments were served and a social time followed with a musical program by bob and ..charles denbow on the electric organ and the guitar. later dancing was enjoyed with the music by the vipers of greenville. on april 11, 1968, the 1968 state championship team was once again feted at the annual basketball banquet sponsored by the alumni association. 92 history of monson, maine monson slater town basketball team in 1932, monson also had a victorious professional basketball team. those participating in that were the following: aubrey kronholm, mike bennett, wilbur kronholm, roland johnson, charles douglass-and edwin holmbom. this monson slater town team won the pro fessional county basketball championship and also won a championship for professionals in bangor. monson academy track team the first county track meet was held at dover foxcroft on may 19, 1934. although it was the first track meet in the history of the county it proved very successful. monson academy, led by captain eino suomi, won the county championship with a total of 48.75 points while milo high school came through with 46.50 points to win second honors. the letter men were: cap tain eino suomi, robert zimmerman, philip soderquist, clayton jackson, clifton jackson, galen vventworth,and george carlson. history of monson, maine 93 monson pond - elliottsville road homer hill foreground - dore farm background - homer farm 94 history of monson, maine indian point on lake hebron (old photo) lake hebron looking towards russell mountain history of monson, maine 95 r ss , and aily rain-in-the-facev last indian family to live on indian point indin pon boat with stack is the molly tomah ii. (old photo) 96 history of monson, maine mrs. maude bray mrs. addie williams mrs. margaret poole seth w. steward artist history of monson, maine 97 personalities 1972 - monson's oldest senior citizens: mrs. margaret brown poole - was born november 25, 1877, on prince edward island. she came to monson at the age of six and attended monson's pub lic schools. mrs. poole married carl poole of monson on june 8, 1895. she is the mother of five children: margaret poole bishop, monson; hazen, deceased; thomas, green ville; sheldon, miami, florida; and oswald, monson. mrs. poole has 12 grandchildren. she is a former mem ber of the north star rebekah lodge and is a member of the church circle. (she died at brown's nursing home on september 17, 1972.) mrs. maude young bray - was born january 31, 1878 in sherman mills, maine. she came to monson to attend monson academy. she later taught rural school in sherman mills. mrs. bray married willie alden bray march 7, 1896. they owned and operated a grocery store in monson for many years. mrs. bray was active in all civic projects and president of the baptist circle and a past noble grand of north star rebekah lodge. she was librarian of monson public library for several years. she did some practical nursing, but was especially intes ested in maternity cases. in the beginning she went to the homes of her patients then later took maternity cases in her home and helped deliver 100 babies. mrs. bray now lives in her own home and is a semi-invalid. mrs. addie h. williams - born addie alice hayden, may 7, 1879, in brighton, maine. until her marriage in 1902, to richard williams she had worked in the woolen mills in sangerville, and hotels in monson and kineo. she has two sons, aubrey of guilford, and 98 history of monson, maine dana of monson. mrs. williams has two grandchildren and two great grandchildren. addie is a member of the monson congregational church, a former member of the united circle, mission circle, and the stella grace phi lathea class. she is also a former member of the north star rebekah lodge, of which she is a past noble grand, and of euclid chapter, order of eastern star. she also belonged to the woman's club for many years. mrs. williams had spent most of her life in monson except for a few years in dover--foxcroft,clinton, and bangor. (she died at brown's nursing home on sept. 4, 1972.) memorable citizens: harry davis - the memory of harry davis will not soon be forgotten to young and old alike. the elderly will always remember him as the "spruce gum king", being the manager of the eastern gum co. of monson, also as a frequent contributor to the down east maga zine and the bangor daily news "maine street" column. mr. davis was active in the business life of monson and served in many town offices. he was an orchardist, flumberman, and saw mill operator. the young will always remember him delivering the gettysburg address each year at the memorial day exercises. he was born in elliottsville, the son of harri son and voda (corliss) davis, came to monson after marrying bessie hebberd of brooklyn, n. y. in 1905 and resided on center st. until his death at the age of 89 on april 29, 1969. seth steward - seth wyman steward, jr., was born at monson, maine, may 4, 1844, the son of seth w. and eliza (baker) steward. he married mary coan in 1875. they had five children: walter (married margaret bigger) ; bertha; maude (married ernest farrar) ; bar history of monson, maine 99 bara (married dr. guy dore) ; raphall. bertha and raphall never married. mr. steward served in the union army. he lived at monson, maine, dorchester, mass. and plainville, conn., where he died july 10, 1934. he was buried in monson, maine. he was in his own words, "a painter, decorator, and artist in oil". he also "hung paper and painted car riages". mr. steward's only formal training was from a mr. cameron, a california artist who spent his summers at kineo. professor william smith knowlton - was born in east sangerville, maine, on oct. 21, 1839, the son of isaiah and lydia (pollard) knowlton. professor knowlton received his higher education at foxcroft academy and waterville college. he lived some 25 years in monson (at different times) and married a mon son girl in 1867 - ellen carr flanders. they had two daughters, grace and ethel. william and ellen knowlton were married about 40 years. prof. knowlton taught at monson academy for the first time in 1862 and taught 17 years here in all, the last time being from 1895-1905. he taught in many different schools in piscataquis county and in other parts of the state. dr. knowlton also practiced for a short time as a lawyer and was a pastor in monson for four years. he represented piscataquis county of maine in both the house and senate. vvilliam s. knowlton wrote the book "the old school master" which was printed in 1905. a book was also published about monson people written in poetry form. prof. knowlton died in newport, maine, in may, 1926 at the home of his daughter miss ethel knowlton at age 86. an address which he gave on aug. 19, 1922, at the monson centennial program on the educational and 100 history of monson, maine religious development, can be found in the centennial book. john francis sprague - was born june 16, 1848, in sangerville, maine, the son of elbridge gerrish sprague and sarah parsons sprague. he was the editor of sprague's journal of maine history for fourteen years. he also was a lawyer, legislator, and historian. in 1874, sprague was admitted to the maine bar association. he moved to monson in 1879 and lived here until 1910, then moved to dover. in 1922-23, he served as senator from piscataquis county. john francis sprague was crippled in the feet and was called uncle john by many people. he published the followin.g books: "sebastian rale" a maine tragedy of the 18th century; "piscataquis biography and frag ments"; "the northeastern boundary controversy and the aroostook war"; "three men from maine" - history of the doric lodge; "backwoods sketches" --articles published in maine historical society journal of ameri can history and the lewiston journal magazine. sprague was a self-educated man. he attended com mon schools until he was 14 years old. he adopted the vocation of peddling in the county until 22 years of age. he read law in 1873-4 with alvah black of paris hill. sprague published his journal from march of 1913 until his death on may 7, 1926. scenic points lake hebron: in 1890-91, the people of monson first began to appreciate the beauties of the lake and its value as a summer resort. the first cottage on indian point was owned by mrs. p. w. knight (now owned by charles finch of n. j.). soon after, more cottages were built history of monson, maine 101 namely: bartlett's (1892) which is now owned by clair and beatrix bray of sangerville and mrs. harriet crafts (1892) now owned by millard and billie emanuelson. the latter one was built by b. b. steward. in 1922, there were quite a number of summer cottages situated at indian point. this land was given by eben and lucy bray in 1890, when a corporation was formed and lots were laid out. an indian family whose name was "rain in-the-face" were the last to live on indian point. mrs. mary f. jones' father, w. farrar, built and owned the now wilson wilkins cottage at indian point. judson cushman owned a cottage on indian point that at one time was used as a little store. he owned the cot tage at the time he had his tailor shop. this cottage is now owned by millard and billie emanuelson. the "loon club" was organized around the 1890's and was situated where francis marshall's camp now stands. camp comfort which was built before 1889, then owned by estabrook, is one of the oldest camps on the. lake. the property is now owned by mr. and mrs. leon savage of pennsylvania. another unforgettable fixture on the lake was the old molly tomah which was built around the 1900's and burned in 1911. it was said that she used to carry pas sengers to and from the loon club and indian point. today lake hebron is surrounded with new and modern camps, most of them with electricity. the last few years have brought about the development of a bathing beach at whiting's cove with supervised swimm ing during the summer months. monson pond: this pond is located on elliottsville road and is another vacation spot about two miles from monson 102 history of monson, maine village. it is surrounded by several cottages and in 1971 a camping and tenting area was built. kelley's orchards are located across the road from the pond which is still another scenic spot when the apple trees are in a full bloom in the spring of the year. homer hill: william hoar came to monson in 1826 and located on the land and built a house where the present house: stands. the only other family living on the hill was a family by the name of gates which sold their land and house (building no longer standing) to w. hoar giving him the title to the whole hill. he sold two small parcels of land to the quarries to dump rubbish on. homer hill has always been a farm. from that time on homer hill has remained. in the family, generation after generation, as follows: william hoar married betsy goodell (daughter of abel goodell, surveyor). they had two sons - james and henry. james went to ohio where he changed his name to homer. henry also changed his name at the same time in 1874. henry homer married sarah mathews (sister to robert mathews' father). they had two sons - edward and wallace and two daughters who died young. wal lace never married. _ edward homer married eliza (annie) pennington. they had one daughter - dorothy. eliza annie died and edward remarried myrtle cook. they had one son henry. dorothy homer married max forbus. they had two daughters, lucinda and candida. max forbus died in. jan. 1970. dorothy forbus is the present owner and resides at the same location on homer hill. history of monson, maine 103 henry homer moved the house where goldsmith harris now lives from below the dore farm on homer hill. this house was where william and betsy hoar lived in their later years. mountains: the following mountains are seen from several points in and around monson. the most prominent and well-known to the townspeople are: (looking east from monson) squaw mountain burnt jacket mountain barren mountain boarstone mountain mt. rochelle lilly bay mt. mt. baker mt. houston (looking west) mt. russell bald mountain range. semi-centennial commemoration the citizens of monson, maine met in academy hall on monday, april 22, 1872. selection by the choir. chairman a. chapin, esq. called the meeting to order and made a few remarks about the past fifty years. prayer offered by rev. r. w. emerson. selection by the choir. historical address by charles davison, esq. appropriate remarks followed the address by rev. a. h. tyler and hon. s. a. patten. poem delivered by w. s. knowlton. j poem by thomas n. lord, preceptor of the academy. 104 history of monson, maine anecdotes of the early settlers pioneer life and "ye olden tyme" were related by j. d. jackson, dea. cush man and joseph green. selections by the choir of grand old times. the exer cises were closed with the singing of "america". audience invited to the room below and partook of an old fashioned supper, prepared by the ladies. toasts were drank and responses made. the attendance was very good in spite of the bad condition of the roads. the monson centennial (taken from piscataquis observer, thurs. aug. 24, 1922) (written by - earle h. jackson) monson very appropriately celebrated the 100th anniversary of the incorporation of the town on saturday, aug. 19, 1922. the weather man kept the people guess ing in this town as well as the surrounding towns during the early morning hours, but evidently had the affair at heart and early in the forenoon brought forth the sun and a better day could not be asked for. the citizens of the town were awakened at 6 o'clock sharp by the pea] of the church bells and the boom of the cannon. at 8 o'clock the flag raising took place. soon after 9 o'clock chairman a. l. bray of the parade committee and marshal of the day got the parade started which was at least as fine as any parade ever seen in this section of maine. thirty--fivedifferent floats, automobiles, and characters made up the parade as fol lows: marshal of the day, a. l. bray; uncle sam, rep resented by l. a. stanchfield; monson band, c. l. jackson, director; oral a. towne post, american legion, august v. peterson, commander; g.a.r., represented by i. p. wing and mrs. i. p. wing represented the w.r.c.; history of monson, maine 105 spanish war veterans, chas. johnson; american flag, 20 x 10, carried by school girls; almon vinton, monson's oldest grand old man, aged 94 years, and mrs. amelia knight, our dear old "aunt amelia", aged 83, in an old fashioned attire and wagon. the next in line were beautifully decorated cars with the "over eighties", baptist church, h. l. stanchfield represented "uncle ben" of the early days and pioneer mail carrier of the early days of monson. a float representing 1822 was followed by a. stromback's prettily decorated touring car, a float by onaway lodge, i.0.0.f., north star re bekah lodge, auxiliary to the american legion. special mention should be made of this float for its beauty and touching effect upon all eyes that rested upon it. the driver of this float was c. c. towne whose eldest son was monson's first contribution to "flanders' field" in france. floats representing the boy scouts and b.s.w. club were very handsome and attractive. monson's old hand tub and new gasoline fire engine were followed by a fine float representing the portland monson slate co., g. p. pullen's float, representing his sporting goods department of his hardware store, brought forth many favorable comments. dover-foxcroft band, j. h. taylor, director, was followed by handsome floats representing davison & hammond's grain and feed mill, d. c. weeks, wood working, a. l. brown's general store, p. w. knight & sons, dry goods, tom leeman's mule team, a float arranged by campers at indian point, lake hebron; a float representing the blaisdell auto co. of dexter, e. h. jackson, local sales man and containing miss beatrix jackson as a butterfly and the jackson twins, clifton and clayton representing frogs, w. a. bray's beautifully decorated car, harry daw's grocery store, a. l. bray's grocery store, the eastern gum co., harry davis, manager, chase & kimball's ford station and the general slate co. 106 history of monson, maine both the slate companies represented had trimming machines and men actually splitting roofing slate and were very interesting, especially to those from out of town. the parade lasted an hour and covered the prin cipal streets of the town. the winners of the floats were as follows: first prize, the auxiliary to the legion, representing flanders' field; second prize, indian point; third prize, mrs. w. a. bray. the judges were dr. 0. f. larson of machias, dr. simmonson of connecticut and g. f. barnard of worcester, mass. special mention should be made of the b.s.w. c1ub'sfloat which was very dainty and handsome. after the parade the monson band went to emerson cove where the water sports were held. mrs. josephine sherburne of brookline, mass. was in charge and pres sented the following: 100 yd. race, won by milton. prentiss; 50 yd. race for girls, won by vivian wing; 50 yd. race for boys, won by roland jacobson; floating contest, won by vivian bray, midget race, won by miss billie sherburne of brookline, mass.; fancy swimming, vivian wing; motor boat race, won by h. e. smith. during the water sports the dover-foxcroft band furnished pleasing music in sherman square and for the track events on main street opposite the academy buildings. the track events were in charge of elmer bigger, a monson boy and athletic teacher. the program: 50 yd. dash for boys, won by james wing; 100 yd. dash, won by toiva anderson; 220 yd. dash, won by toiva anderson; 440 yd. dash, won by aril palmer; potato race, won by lyle towne; standing broad jump, won by laurence inky; 12 lb. shot put, won by laurence inky. at noonexcellent dinners were served by the auxil iary in the masonic banquet rooms, the monson baptist history of monson, maine 107 society, the congregational society and numerous in dividuals. dinner was served at 50 cents a plate. at one o'clock thousands of people gathered on the academy school grounds to listen to the centennial pro gram for which monson band furnished excellent music. dr. william smith knowlton presided, dressed in the garb of his greatgrandfather. dr. knowlton always has something of interest to say and his witty poems are always pleasing to listen to. hon. dudley p. bailey of everett, mass. and son of the first baptist minister in monson, was introduced and spoke on "reminiscences" which was very interesting. "a toast" given by arthur l. brown, monson's gifted reader, brought forth a round of applause, john francis sprague, a. m., editor of sprague's journal of maine history, gave a fine address on "our new citizens". dr. w. s. knowlton, maine's old schoo1master's address on "educational and relig ious development", was extremely interesting. "a look backward after fifty years", given by roland t. pattern of skowhegan was very interesting and ably given. the speaker of the day was dr. shailer mathews, dean of chicago university. he took for his subject "challenge of the past" and those who did not hear his address certainly missed one of the most interesting and able talks ever given before an audience here. at 3:30 the great ball game at chapin avenue ball grounds between guilford a.a. and greenville a.a. was called and hundreds of baseball fans attended. score: greenville, 6, guilford, 5. at seven o'clock the dover-foxcroft band rendered a very fine and pleasing concert in sherman square. the grand ball in spencer's hall at 8 :30 with music by cobby o'brien, seven piece orchestra of bangor, closed the great day, a day long to be remembered by all present. chairman f. h. crane of the centennial committee: has worked unceasingly for weeks that this event might 108 history of monson, maine be successful as have all the other committees. the town was very prettily decorated with fiags as were many private buildings. the stores made special decorations among which harry daw's window representing 1822 and the other window 1922 was very attractive. the eastern gum co. had a beautiful display in one of the windows of we1ch's restaurant. an estimated 4,000 to 5,000 people were in town from far and near and we hope enjoyed themselves as much as monson people enjoyed having them come. during the day nearly 700 people visited the store of edward johnson where hundreds of antiques were on display. among some of the antiques were some of the furnishings of the famous blaine mansion which have been handed down to the family of mrs. charles smith, who is a descen.dant of the original owners of the build ing. a brooch over 600 years old was also loaned by fred larson. there was also a large collection of relics taken from the battlefields of seven wars. the rooms were in charge of mrs. john rice flint and andria towne gerrish. floats: 1st prize - $15.00 - legion auxiliary "flan ders field". 2nd prize --$10.00 - indian point. prizes for the other events ranged from $1.00 --$3.00. history of monson, maine 109 leonard stanchfield uncle sam 1922 centennial parade ----main street 1922 110 history of monson, maine first prize -- american legion auxiliary 1922 "flanders field" second prize -- indian point float -- 1922 history of monson, maine 111 '}':x"m>>a...&.~po:>oio:oo p. e. ward & c0. 'completehome furnishers kroehler furniture -- simmons mattresses magnavox electronics - bigelow carpets - metered lp gas maytag washers and dryers dover-foxcroft, maine 04426 history of monson, maine 211 western auto associate store home owned by john and marion morrison guilford, maine )o:oooioooooo:o:>oc:>oo storer's home care center monson - tel. 997-2659 hardware, houseware & paint misc. building, plumbing, electrical and sporting goods aluminum combination windows and doors o:>o:o:oo:oiopsooo:o compliments of johnston and hibbard guilford, maine tel. 876-3382 0:010:01o1o:o:o:>o1>o:>o:>o:o:>o compliments of davis bros. furniture and gold nugget restaurant guilford, maine history of monson, maine 213 jo l's toppe knott shoppe complete beauty service joyce lander, prop. tel. 997-3620 monson, maine 0zoeoi0joz>0zoeoeoioectoeoeo compliments of f. g. marshall insurance agency monson, maine ' tel. office tel. home 997-3655 997-3678 bototoeotczoeoeoeozoeoeotoeo poole's market beer, groceries, & quality meats open seven days a week serving monson for 20 years phone 997-3321 monson m:0:oo:>oc:o:>oo:oio:>o:>ooooo titus jewelry store gifts - jewelry - watches tel.: 564-2194 48 union square dover foxcroft, maine compliments of koritsky's dept. store dover-foxcroft, maine "the store of national brands" use our free parking lot in rear of store >0ioioeoloolozoioi010101010' tel. 564-3376 meisner & herring, inc. john deere farm & industrial machinery full line of repairs building material iron hardware 11 summer street dover-foxcroft maine history of monson, maine 215 plumbing compliments of spredsatin heating weatherbee's inc. housewares sheet metal _ _ wall paper work quahty plus servlce hardware telephone 654-3370 dover-foxcroft, maine 010:0:oc:o:o:oo:>oc:>o::>o:oio-' our congratulations on monson, maine's 150th anniversary ed and evelyn adams blue goose antiques main street manson, maine we are interested in purchasing anything of historical value, also antique furniture, paintings, glass, dolls, toys, lamps, etc. please write: p. o. box 171, monson, maine 04464 ooioo:ossoo:o:o:o patronize our advertisers they helped to make this history possible 216 history of monson, maine triangle service station malcolm j". drurnmond guilford, maine 01010106:oooo:>o:>o:>o:>o>> sears. roebuck and co. gene johnson 42 main street authorized catalog dover--foxcroft, maine sales merchant phone: (207) 564-2221 .oooo=>oo=>ooo:>oooo:>oo keep maine green history of~monson, maine 217 monson laundramat open 6 a. m. to 10 p. m. seven days a week manson, maine ooo:oo:o:oio hutchins brothers printers thorndike, maine 04986 '\oio10:oi0i0io10(:>oiozd0101030 daigle & daigle hardware and building materials carpenters phone: 997-3327 or 997-3673 rt. 15, monson, maine telephone 997-3327 history of monson, maine 219 dedicated to supplying the finest in products and service to the people of the monson and the penquis areas. chase 8: klmball oil company large enough to provide the finest -- ---- dependable fuel oil products qualified service personnel complete heating installation dept. & a storage in excess or 100,000 gallons of heating oils __ small enough to sincerely care for every customer, domestic& commerciar 45 union square ddver-fuxcruft, me.