history of veazie, maine by jean hamilton veazie sawmills (late 1800's) from eddington side looking across to veazie — oak hill in background this map is a section taken from an old map of the city of bangor at the gar museum. it was published in 1853 by s.s. smith, 17 west market square, bangor. henry f. walling, 81 washington st. boston, mass. was the civil engineer. veazie, maine samuel veazie 1787-1868 1 this book is dedicated to the pioneers of veazie. 2 preface i have thoroughly enjoyed doing the history of veazie, of veazie, young and old, will like my writing style and even when i had my moments of discouragement. my will appreciate my effort... thanks to the many people who kept encouraging and prodding me. i do not profess to be a writer so i apolo- my thanks to the comprehensive employment and gize for any omissions. my only hope is that the people training act for the grant which funded my position. jean hamilton 3 acknowledgements mrs. stanley (persis) messer, my proofreader, (bless john davis her!) francis webster irving lancaster waldo jordan william jordan john skinner norman prouty, jr. frank jordan, sr. frank todd ralph drinkwater clinton vanaken andrew laughland joseph king, jr. mrs. stewart hodgman miss addie weed michael monroe mrs. joseph king, sr. i wish to thank all the people, too numerous to mention, who were of great assistance to me these past months with their time, pictures, and bits of information. 4 index charter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6 early history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8 turn of the century . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18 bangor hydro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26 old veazie railroad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39 electric cars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44 schools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47 churches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58 public services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .65 cemetery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .67 police department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .70 fire department . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .74 recreation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .77 stories about people . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .81 post war era ’45-'77 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .95 town meetings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .96 town officers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .101 members of armed forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .105 present day businesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .109 bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .124 5 state of maine veazie shall be entitled to receive, which the said city shall be bound to pay. in the year of our lord one thousand eight hun- the compensation of said committee shall be paid dred and fifty three by said city and town in such proportion as shall be determined by said committee. an act all paupers now supported by the city of bangor, or which may hereafter become chargeable to said to incorporate the town of veazie city by reason of settlement gained in the territory be it enacted by the senate and house of included in the town of veazie shall be hereafter sup- representatives in legislature assembled, as follows: ported by and chargeable to said town of veazie. section 1 - the territory, with the inhabitants section 3 - the said inhabitants of veazie shall thereon, of that part of the city of bangor situate and be holden to pay all the taxes, which have been being within the following boundaries, namely; legally assessed upon them by said city of bangor, commencing at the penobscot river, on the west- prior to the date of this act; and the collector of taxes erly side thereof, on the westerly line of the original for said city is hereby authorized to collect and pay settler’s lot numbered twenty-nine of the plan of the over all taxes already committed to said collector, town of bangor, by park holland; thence northerly according to his warrant. binding on said westerly line of said lot; to the northerly end of said lot; and thence continuing the section 4 - any justice of the peace in the coun- same course to centre line of the stillwater avenue, ty of penobscot may issue his warrant to any legal so called; thence easterly binding on the centre line voter in said town of veazie, directing him to notify of said avenue to the southerly line of the town of the inhabitants thereof, to meet at a time and place orono; thence southerly binding on the southerly specified in said warrant for the choice of town offi- line of said orono to the river aforesaid, thence west- cers, and to transact such other business as the towns erly on the said river to the place begun at, be and the in this state are authorized to do at their annual and same hereby is incorporated into a town by the name other meetings. of veazie, and vested with all the powers and privi- leges, and subject to all the duties and liabilities of section 5 - the inhabitants of said veazie shall the other town in the state. be classed with said city of bangor for the choice of representatives to the legislature, unless and until section 2 - the city of bangor shall retain, own the legislature otherwise order. and possess all the property which at the date of, this act belongs to and is situated within the limits of said section 6 - this act shall take from and after its city: and the said town of veazie shall retain, own approval by the governor; provided, however, that and possess all the property which at the date of this this act of incorporation shall be accepted by two act belongs to and is situated within the limits of said thirds of the legal voters, resident within the limits of town and a committee of three dis-interested persons said town, whose names are on the check list of ward shall be appointed, one to be selected by said city, seven in the city of bangor, for the march election of and one by said town, and the other by the persons the year eighteen hundred and fifty-three, at a meet- so selected, to appraise the true value of said proper- ing called for that purpose, and held before the first ty within the limits of said city and town respective- day of september next, of which notice of the time ly; and in case the debts and liabilities of said city and place shall be given by publication in the whig shall exceed, according to the appraisal of said com- and courier, mercury jeffersonian and democrat, by mittee, the value of the property by the said city one or more publications at least seven days before retained, owned and possessed as aforesaid, then the the day of meeting; such notice to be signed by any said committee shall determine upon just and equi- three of the petitioners for said town and if not so table principles, the proportion of the excess of said accepted, this act shall not take effect. indebtedness and liabilities of said city that shall be paid to said city by the inhabitants of veazie: and if the value of said property so ascertained shall exceed the amount of indebtedness and liabilities of said city as aforesaid, said committee shall determine upon just and equitable principle, the proportion of the excess of said property which the inhabitants of in the house of representatives, march 25, 1853. i hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of this bill having had three several readings, passed to the original deposited in this office be enacted. a true copy attested: john c. talbot, jr. speaker john g. sawyer - secretary of state, in senate march 25, 1853. this bill having had a.j. stockwell - town clerk two several readings passed to be enacted. samuel butman, president. march 26, 1853. approved william g. crosby secretary office augusta, april 1, 1853. late 1800’s. wing dam for veazie sawmills. old company houses in background on left. hose house shown on river bank. 7 early history veazie, the smallest town in penobscot county (con- by a number of french, english, and portuguese explor- sisting of four square miles or 2,560 acres), is about a ers. some of them left journals in which the penobscot mile north of bangor. until its incorporation in 1853, river is mentioned. most of these explorers spoke of the veazie was a part of bangor, known both as ward 7 and bountiful supply of fish and wildlife found in the region, as north bangor. its early history must therefore include gave conflicting reports on the friendliness of the indians, some of the story of bangor and early settlements and/or and sailed away. fortifications along the penobscot river. one of the explorers, however, had a greater impact long before the first european explorers had come to on the history of the region. this man was samuel de the eastern shores of north america, people from asia champlain. when exploring the maine coast he sailed up had passed over the land bridge then existing across the penobscot river perhaps looking for fabulous bering straits onto the alaskan peninsula. over several norumbega - a city described by earlier visitors as one thousand years descendants of these peoples gradually whose streets were paved with gold and whose houses spread out over the entire north american continent. were adorned with precious jewels. he found, of course, slowly they adapted their life styles to the new lands and no golden city but a small indian village at the place climates. today we refer to these people as the american where kenduskeag stream enters the penobscot river. indians. champlain undoubtedly anchored his vessel near where newbury street is now. several large rocks on the river eventually some of these indians reached maine and bed, exposed at low tide, just below the eastern maine established themselves along its many rivers. the fishing medical center, and treat falls a bit farther upstream pre- and hunting were excellent. it was an easy matter to burn vented champlain from further exploration up the off plots of land or make use of natural clearings for small penobscot. gardens. maize, as they called corn, grew well and they also raised a few beans and pumpkins or squash. back in europe, champlain advertised the wealth of the new lands he had explored. these lands, which he these people were basically a nomadic people and called acadia, stretched from maine to the st. lawrence never really became settled farmers. even so they had river. his intention was to attract men to the wilderness favorite stopping places where the fishing was very good to open up the fur trade with the indians. the new busi- or the corn grew unusually well. one such place was the ness would provide revenue for france’s growing armies area that is now veazie and which was known for a long giving it a chance to strike back at the hapsburghs who time as “the plains". the fishing was probably good at threatened it. champlain was quite successful and the the two falls especially when the salmon were running. acadian fur trade remained a stable source of income for there was also plenty of sandy soil good for raising corn. the french empire for one hundred years. here, it has been said, was negas (variant spellings found, negu and neguw), an indian village of sorts, the french enjoyed a good relationship with the known to have existed near the end of the seventeenth indians because they did not try to settle on the land but century. seasonally and periodically abandoned, little lived among the indians. taking indian wives, many of traces of the village’s century long history can be found. the traders became related to the indians and became an occasional artifact is all that remains. some place the part of their communities. site of negas at the head of tidewater, called in later times fort hill and now thompson’s point. others place the the rivalry between the english and the french for village slightly farther up river near where silver’s power in the old world and for trade and territory in the construction company is located. perhaps the village new world had its devastating effects on maine which and its cultivated plots sprawled along the river bank for early became a battleground between the two countries some distance, or there may have been campgrounds in their wars for supremacy in america. the french outside the village proper. thompson’s point would seem claimed that their acadia extended west to the banks of to be the more logical site as it would have afforded com- the penobscot river. the british debated this point and mand of the river for some distance as well as the portage sought to push their claims further to the east. around the falls. no doubt negas was involved in many of the intertribal wars and migrations. it may have both the english and the french set up trading posts, changed hands several times. or truck houses as they were called, in order to do busi- ness with the indians. to strengthen their claims to the nearly four centuries ago the maine coast was visited penobscot, the french set up a trading post near the 8 mouth of kenduskeag stream with smaller posts nearby - stockton. this secured the region for english trade and one of them being located at fort hill in veazie. about settlement. 1657 an englishman, william crowne, established a fur trading house governor pownall, accompanied on this expedition ’far up ye penobscot at a place called negue to which by general samuel waldo, a great promoter of settle- he gave his own name, crowne point.' ments in the province of maine, reconnoitered the river this was probably located about where dr. manter’s to the first falls above bangor. pownall and waldo land- house stands today. ed on the east side of the river, and with a sizeable group of soldiers proceeded up river on foot. they had marched in 1713, the treaty of utrecht granted acadia to the some four miles when general waldo, aged sixty-three, british. it was only a diplomatic gesture as far as the suffered a stroke and died shortly afterwards. this put a penobscot was concerned as the french continued in halt to further exploration. the body of general waldo their posts along the river. the british asserted their hege- was taken down to fort pownal where it was buried with mony over the river by sending a captain heath and a full military honors. small band of men from the kennebec to destroy the french posts on the penobscot in 1725. the fort at fort before returning down river pownall recorded in hill was later rebuilt by the french and indians for it his journal: seemed necessary to them to keep open the penobscot as the english controlled the kennebec and st. john rivers. “at the head of the falls - buried a leaden plate with the following inscription: ’may 23, 1759, province in the spring of 1759, governor thomas pownall of massachusetts bay dominions of great britain - massachusetts came to the penobscot, landing at a spot possession confirmed by t. pownal, governor.' “ somewhere near belfast to hold a meeting with the indians. he told them he had come to build a fort and to this plate must have been buried somewhere in the make the land english. a fort was erected on vicinity of eddington bend. wassumkeag point, now called fort point, in the town of 9 settlement, 1760 - 1830 fort pownall opened the river to settlement. it offered north bangor company prudently disbanded. some protection from the indian and french. more impor- tant, it offered the psychological presence of the british growth after the war was slow. bangor had few attrac- empire. over the next few years settlements were started tions compared to the newly opened northwest territories. along the river - first beside its lower reaches, later, farther in 1798, the general court passed a law allowing the set- upstream. tlers already on the land to gain a clear title to their land. settlers resident before 1784 could pay five dollars for their the first settler at bangor was jacob buswell who came 100 acre tract while settlers who had arrived between from massachusetts with his wife and nine children. 1784 and 1798 could purchase their lot for one dollar an buswell, like many others who came to maine, was a poor acre. man, a squatter, who had no legal title to the land on which he built his crude log cabin at a spot where st. perhaps more important than the sale was the authori- john’s catholic church now stands. more settlers arrived in zation to have the land surveyed. this survey by park 1770 and built houses up the kenduskeag. in 1771 silas holland set up the boundary lines we still use today. these and solomon harthorn settled on the plains above mount boundaries have affected the face of the land as much as hope becoming the first english settlers in what is now any other action of man. much of the land in the northeast veazie. on september 10, 1772, hannah harthorn, end of town was granted to benjamin bussey. the remain- daughter of silas harthorn, was born. she was the first der was probably divided among the harthorns, william white child born in veazie. lowder, william thompson and the mcphetres. some of the land may have been retained by the commonwealth the harthorns were industrious businessmen-farmers for later sale. from worcester, massachusetts. realizing the value of the region’s lumber, they hired a joseph manse[ from scituate, the region grew moderately until 1835. there were massachusetts, to build a sawmill at the mouth of perhaps a dozen families in town in 1820. most had farms penjejawock stream just below mount hope. along the road to orono, now state and main street. the only other road was the shore road, now running under the area at the confluence of the stream and the river the power lines along the river. soon became a center of commerce. silas harthorn was hired to build the first frame house near there for jedidiah william thompson ran a ferry across the river at the tip preble sometime before the revolution. it was occupied of the point named for him. isaac spencer kept a store and later by a captain jameson and used as a tavern, the first there was a tavern and a school. in 1835, isaac spencer in bangor. this house later served as a truck house for trad- was brought to trial for the murder of reuben mcphetres. ing with the indians. after three days, he was found guilty. his sentence was commuted from death to life imprisonment. there was no for many years the place was known as the forbes’ mention of what prison but it does say that he became a place. the first school in the area, taught by abigail maniac and died. forbes, was held in this house. the townspeople had a reputation in bangor. they by the revolution, the plains were sparsely settled. were thought of as the unsophisticated rubes of the time. nevertheless, they had a patriotic role in the war. in 1775, joseph carr, in 1870, reminisced about the harthorns, the british dismantled fort pownall fearing it would fall mcphetres, spencers and inmans coming into his father’s into continental hands. bangor citizens organized a com- store in bangor in the 1820’s. saturdays they would bring pany of rangers consisting of twenty whites and ten in their “shingles, salmon, shad, smoked alewives and indians. this small group built a crude fort at the corner of credit for which they wanted tea, tobacco, calico and the county road and shore road, defending the route rum". he calls them genial souls with their santa cruz rum north. the rangers were active in the area until 1779 as essential as meat and clothing - santa cruz no doubt when the british re-fortified castine and took control of the eased many of the troubles of life in the wilderness. mr. upper river. the americans were overwhelmed and the carr’s list of goods traded suggests the village’s reliance on 10 the river. farm products were used for subsistence while the severe weather of 1816, when there was a frost fish and wood were sold for cash or bartered for goods. every month, must have hurt these people and discour- these must have been hardscrabble farmers working aged new settlement. some of the newer people no doubt for their own livelihood rather than for cash. this made life gave up the frontier life for jobs in the cities and the south. very unstable. these rough-cut subsistence farmers formed this may help explain the small 1820 population. the base of the town. although not involved in the town’s later politics their influence is still felt in many forms. 11 1820 map taken from history of penobscot county, maine. cleveland: williams, chase & co. (in possession of frank todd) 12 lost villages (sources: rollins plan, 1853 map, censuses, misc. town laborers as the mills declined and the workers emigrated. papers) eventually much of the land was acquired by bangor hydro. in the nineteenth century there was a small village on the shore road near where graham station and the prouty the census record shows that there was a small irish development are today. at least a dozen families lived community at the corner of grove and school streets. there and had their own school. about ten young families settled there during the 1850’s probably attracted by the thriving mills and farms. the ellen pratt and caroline dunbar taught school in 1856. men took jobs as unskilled laborers and farmhands. by the in 1866, the school became an issue. the annual meeting turn of the century the enclave had become part of the voted to sell it. a special town meeting in october revoted community. the issue and decided to move the building instead. we cannot be sure if the school was moved but it was still the sullivan family is a good example. michael known as the school house on rollins 1900 plan, though sullivan came to veazie sometime in the 1850’s. he this may be an item inadvertently carried over from older worked in the sawmills for many years. in 1865 he married plans when he was compiling the newer one. mary hickson of bangor. they soon had a growing family. his children went to the town schools. when they were rollins’ plan also reveals the fate of the village. it shows older he left the mill and started a grocery store. judging by that all the land that was held by various families in 1880 the number of people in debt to him it was a successful was held in 1900 by j.w. veazie and ).e. morrill. the larg- venture. in 1905, his son, michael jr., became a selectman er landholders no doubt bought up the small farmers and and served several years thereafter. 13 lumbering, 1830-1889 the hathorn’s mill at penjejawock stream brought total of fifty two in all. he was truly a lumber baron. about great things for the penobscot region. several mills were built to cut the white pine for local uses. these were when general veazie first came to bangor he lived on small plants usually family owned and operated. harlow street near what is now abott square. he soon built himself a fine home on the corner of broadway and a boom hit bangor in 1835. people rushed to the city york street. in 1854 he built a new home in veazie now and speculated in land and lumber. the population grew the home of robert turner. he continued to live in bangor rapidly for two or three years. hotels and inns sprang up during the winter months. over night to house and feed the speculators. brothels and bars opened to supply other needs. the local sawmills sup- he acquired the penobscot log boom in 1833 from plied lumber for the new building. new larger mills were rufus dwinel. he largely rebuilt the main boom on the built to cut wood for export. the boom petered out in stillwater river and improved the subsidiary booms on the 1837 and stagnation set in. the growth of the mills slowed penobscot. this put him in an excellent position to cash in greatly. on the 1835 bubble, which he may well have had a hand in creating. apparently he became less careful of his cus- to talk about lumber in veazie is to talk about general tomers than he had been on the androscoggin. the lum- samuel veazie. although he did not build the corporation bermen, already squeezed by the contraction after the mills at north bangor, he bought them and operated them speculation, complained to the legislature in 1838 forcing for many years. and, of course, he was responsible for sep- them to add a committee of lumbermen with wide mana- arating the town from bangor. gerial powers to the boom’s charter. the first such commit- tee included ira wadleigh, amos m. roberts and daniel samuel veazie was born in 1787 in portland, maine. white. the wadleighs were the general’s major competi- his family was neither poor nor very wealthy. he was tors in old town. the arguments that must have developed apprenticed to a baker but seeing no future in that trade, can only be imagined. veazie became more interested in he became a sailor. it is said that he made his first fortune other ventures and sold the boom to david pingree in by clever use of his stowage rights aboard ship. just how 1847. he managed to raise enough to purchase a ship this way is not told. in any case, he operated his own vessel for sever- through a series of lawsuits general veazie acquired al years. the bangor, old town and milford railroad which had started out in 1836 as the bangor and piscataquis canal he tired of shipboard life and settled in topsham where and railroad company. soon it was popularly known as he tried tobacco manufacturing and general store keeping. the “veazie railroad.” later he bought the androscoggin boom. a boom is a sys- tem which catches logs as they come down the river so thoreau noted in his journal that he rode on this rail- that they can be sorted for their owners and sold to the road as did his guide joe polis. mills. because there could be only be one boom on a given river this gave veazie a powerful monopoly. he later veazie bought the bank of bangor naming himself seemed to have used his power moderately, avoiding the president and manager. he changed its name to veazie wrath of the lumbermen. he also contributed generously bank appointing james crosby, samuel j. foster, nathaniel to various social agencies in topsham. lord and john bright as his directors and william p. richardson as his cashier. this was the largest bank in veazie worked his way up in the militia. he took part bangor for many years. veazie’s banking style was rough in the war of 1812, entering as an ensign, and rose rapid- and ready. he was called before the legislature at one time ly to the rank of general, a title he used the rest of his life. for over extending his reserves. he also refused to join the national bank system, carrying his case to the u.s. interest in lumbering turned veazie’s attention to the supreme court, which forced him to join. penobscot. in 1826 he bought the jackson davis mills in old town. he continued to buy mills on the west side of one of veazie’s minor manipulations was the founding the river until he owned all of them from old town to of the town of veazie. by 1853, bangor had grown to be a bangor - nineteen in old town, the corporation mills in city of 15,000. to take care of all these people, the cost veazie consisting of twenty or more, thirteen in orono - a was great, so the taxes were high. ward seven, (north 14 bangor) was largely rural. far away from the downtown at the recent death of general samuel veazie to whom mills, the farmers and local citizens objected to the high the town is indebted for its separate municipal exis- taxes which went to support services in the downtown tence and for its name - that they highly appreciate his area. general veazie intervened on the citizens’ behalf and character as a citizen who in his various relations with managed to get the legislature to approve a charter for a the town has and maintained a high character for fair new town separate from bangor. the legislature was suspi- and honorable dealing, won the confidence and regard cious of the general’s motives and wrote the charter so of the people.” that the townspeople had to approve or disapprove the separation. the referendum question came back to haunt the next year it was proposed that bangor, brewer the legislature in later debates on other issues. the people and veazie unite into one municipality. such an idea could approved the separation, one hundred thirty six to two, not have been contemplated while the general lived. and veazie became a separate corporation on june 27, bangor appointed a committee to study the idea. veazie 1853. refused to appoint a committee, so the thought died. after complicated negotiations the town paid the por- john w. veazie, samuel veazie’s eldest son, managed tion of 1853 taxes due to bangor. this of course, was a his father’s veazie mills for many years but he was not the boon to the veazie family which owned most of the prop- businessman his father was. in 1868, he donated the erty in town. corporation house to the town for the first town hall. this served for many years and still stands on judson street. the general was an active but subtle force in veazie john presided over the decline of the veazie mills. as the politics. in the 1850’s and early ’60’s he served as town white pine ran out, the boom in veazie expired. he leased treasurer and agent. there was tension between the his mills to gilman and webster company and others, veazies and the other townspeople which lingered just including l. & f. h. strickland. below the surface. in the fall of 1865 the tension broke. the general, having left his posts in the spring before, john w. veazie moved to yankton in the dakota failed to pay his taxes promptly. a special town meeting in territory in 1886, but returned to veazie five years later september directed the assessors to look into the matter. at and soon died of pneumonia. about the same time the penobscot mill dam company received a charter from the legislature to build a dam in 1889 the mill era ended. the town could not attract somewhere between rise falls and mcmahon falls. the other businesses. it offered several tax abatements to new exact location was left to the company’s discretion. industries to settle in the town but these also failed. apparently they chose veazie’s gardiner’s falls as a likely site but the general refused to deal with them. the towns- bangor electric light and power company leased the people, hearing of this, petitioned the selectmen for a spe- veazie lumber company’s land and water rights and built cial town meeting to register the town’s position. the a new timber crib dam and hydroelectric plant. this plant meeting, held in november, produced a curiously humble provided power for the new street railway that was built yet threatening petition. amid reassurances to the veazies along the orono road in that year. that they meant no harm in asking them to sell out, the townspeople expressed a certain exasperation with the samuel veazie had another son named jones p. veazie. “royal” family. in the end they appointed a committee to twice married, he had two sons and one daughter by each talk to the veazies about it and that was the end of it. the wife. jones became interested in shipping, founding a large dam was not built in veazie. successful lumbering business with levi young, in ottawa, canada. he was a respected businessman and very much general veazie died in 1868 at eighty years of age. he opposed to slavery. in 1842, he was one of the greatest is buried in mount hope cemetery. in town meeting a res- contributors to the establishment of the bangor gazette. olution in memoriam was passed. he died in february 1875. march 30, 1868 - “voted that the inhabitants of veazie done in their municipal capacity to express this regret 15 (taken from old tax book owned by frank todd) town of veazie residents, 1862 samuel veazie $1099.27 the tax book i got this information from does not show if these figures were delinquent taxes or not. i inserted them to show the readers what mr. veazie paid for taxes in 1862. general samuel veazie home (1800’s) general veazie home today. now owned by robert turner. veazie bank note (enlarged 3 times actual size.) 16 john w. veazie home built by gen. samuel veazie for his son in the 1800’s. presently owned by the kenneth hayes family, it is located on olive street, (formerly known as corporation hill. late 1800’s - taken from the old wing dam, showing the bridge to the lumber mill, and the mill company houses, on the shore above the power station. 17 turn of century with the closing of the mills, there was little work for railway. (taxes were a large problem in the 1890’s.) the many of the mill hands and laborers. many of them moved town claimed $4823.00 due in back taxes which the com- to other maine communities where they found employ- pany refused to pay. it was equitably settled by a decrease ment in the pulp, paper, leather, and textile mills. some in valuation and a payment of $1000.00. once the line farmers and farmhands moved west to the mississippi was built, it posed a hazard to life and limb. several peo- valley now cleared of hostile indians. veazie’s population ple were killed in streetcar accidents over the years. fell steadily from its founding until 1900 when the rate of decrease slowed. the lowest point was in 1920 with five the great depression hit veazie about as hard as hundred and four people. the population was low but the everywhere else. in response the town allowed residents to town was still active. in 1880 the town had no sewers, work on town projects in lieu of cash to pay taxes. the electricity, town water, or telephone services. by 1940 it town voted heavily for hoover in 1932 and even more had all of these. heavily for landon in 1936 yet cashed in on roosevelt’s programs in building the town hall in 1938. in 1889, the town approved the construction of the new hydro-electric station, (the first in maine,) and grant- the general impression of this era in the town’s history ed the bangor street railway rights to build a single track is one of growth in services rather than population. the along the county road. the street railway opened the mood of the town changed. always frugal, the town turned town to commuters. this allowed veazie people to work in from a puritan frugality to a more comfortable twentieth bangor and old town. century frugality. never could the town be said to be har- monious. no issue was approved by a large majority and the street railway ran into several problems. first, there most were recalled and haggled over time and again. was the question of where the right of way should go. after several heated meetings it was decided to allow it on the the bickering subsided during world war ii in the face east side of the orono road. the town also overvalued the of a larger foe. standing at end of school street looking down on shore road and mill street 18 sidewalks became an issue at the turn of the century. a dynamo, lacked the power to drive the trolley so the site year after year people would propose new sidewalks for of the old lumber mill in veazie was selected as the new olive, state and flagg streets. they were consistently power station. in 1891 the public works company, the first voted down or if voted they would not be built and the hydro electric station in maine, was ready. equipped with appropriation returned the next year. to this day there are a steam engine and boilers for stand-by, this project still only dirt walks. became one of the early successful attempts of the trans- mission of electricity in the united states. 1923-town voted to build a gravel sidewalk from j. miller’s to elm tree, so-called, on the west side of the road. the public works company, with a new president, james h. cutler, increased in size. by 1900 the veazie 1925-town rescinded $1000.00 set aside for a sidewalk power station was operating over thirty miles of electric and placed money in poor, ($300.00,) dependent railway, ten thousand incandescent electric lamps, and children, ($342.86,) highway, ($228.00,) remodeling nearly one hundred horse power in small motors in hall, ($79.18,) school incidentals, ($50.00). bangor. john graham accepted the position of general manager and treasurer of the public works company in in 1887 the bangor street railway made application for 1902. on february 16, 1905 he took an option to buy the a franchise to build and operate an electric railway in company’s entire holdings. the name was changed to bangor. president f. m. laughton and f. h. clergue, bangor railway and electric company, consolidating the treasurer, two early pioneers, persistent with foresight and street railway, electric lighting, and the water rights of the courage accomplished what they set out to do. they were old company. in 1913 a new cement dam was built across responsible for the first electric street railway in new the penobscot river. (rumor has it that the old timber dam england. in 1889 three and one half miles of track was laid that was there prior to the cement dam had been built from east hampden up main street and state street, eighty years before.) if you walk down river road, (called exchange and pearl streets. the first trolley travelled six mill road in days gone by,) you will see this present dam, miles an hour. difficulties arose. the generator, known as with a fishway, and the veazie hydro plant. sawmill crew (late 1800’s) 19 twenty five or thirty years ago the ’pit', as the veazie electrically: they sit side by side in what appears to be a power station was called, had a generating capacity of sluiceway. 9200 kilowatts. the power intake came from orono, milford, ellsworth and howland hydro power stations, veazie hydro ran a set of railroad tracks up to the with a tie line from veazie hydro to central maine power plant so that the trains could haul in cars of coal which company for the purpose of load demand. when graham was used to heat up the boilers to generate electricity. the station was built in 1954 the intake was fed to this plant workers would climb up in the coal cars and shovel the for distribution. at present veazie hydro’s intake and dis- coal into the chutes and into the plant coal bins. men tribution involves only orono and stillwater. there are two inside the plant were kept busy keeping the ’fires hot’ distribution lines: number 33 is veazie and line number 37 under the boilers. this was quite a process and no doubt it is eddington. was more economical than today’s crude oil with its ’fuel adjustment.’ the dam was noted for its hinged flashboards four feet high which operated from an overhead cable. there the veazie power station owned a small heavy are two tainter gates situated between the two buildings. metal push car which sat on the tracks down near the end these gates were the first of its kind to be used on the east- of olive street. this car was used on occasion to move ern seaboard. the gates control the head waters going into generators and transformers. “pete” (as francis webster is station b. if any difficulties arise with either of the two known,) told me about the fun he and leonard lancaster water wheels and they need to be checked, the tainter had going back and forth to school with this push car. it gates are closed, stopping the water flow temporarily. the became their means of transportation on many occasions gates are unique. they look like two huge oil drums cut in ...when they got out of school, they’d run down olive half lengthwise. each one is approximately thirty feet in street to the push car, push it to gather speed and jump on, length and each one is separately controlled, manually or coasting along. they’d repeat this “operation” until they veazie hydro dam and fishway 20 reached the area behind lou silver’s construction (with no difficulty,) would jump onto the car from the top company. they’d jump off, go home to lunch, then return of that hill. i understand many of the children used this to the push car and go through the same procedure back push car as a means of play. to olive street. pete said that leonard would stand on a small hill and when he and the push car came by, leonard, 21 shift workers at veazie hydro (early 1900’s) veazie hydro about 1910 inspecting a new water wheel. steps in rear were built for superintendent henry perkins who lived up on hill. 22 march 1936 - heavy rains and melting snows cause flooding at veazie hydro station - upstream end of veazie station, showing main entrance with board barricade to keep water out of the station. high water in forebay at veazie station, showing outside wall of generator room. platform which runs entire length of station used for track for rack rake under water. 23 late 1930’s personnel veazie station 1. james m. gamble superintendent 2. mortimer d. wentworth operator 3. harold m. wentworth operator 4. arthur c. welch operator 5. ralph e. shorey operator 6. oscar j. paulin utility man 7. charles e. hersey asst. operator 8. horace e. perkins operator 9. fred d. marsh asst operator 10. herman l. mutch asst superintendent 11. james e. parks repairman 12. millard c. spencer repairman 13. osgood f. sidelinker janitor 24 late 1930’s 1. at frost pond: mrs. ralph shorey, francina gamble, alice shorey, ruth shorey, carolyn gamble 2. ivan son of harold wentworth 3. james gamble with a few trout 4. ralph shorey with a bear 5. norma and janet, daughters of charles hersey 6. eugene, son of james gamble 7. james, son of harold wentworth 8. bernice stevens, granddaughter of james parks in the late 1940s bangor hydro electric company edward graham dedicated the new plant, graham station. began to take notice of the low water conditions in the mr. graham pulled the master switch putting the first river plus the growth of the company’s need for more gen- steam electric generating unit in the company’s system into erating capacity. they began to plan seriously for some- operation. a second unit was installed in 1957 and the thing more efficient. they looked to the feasibility of the third steam electric generator was added in 1964, bringing gas turbine. in 1950 the first gas turbine was built and put the total generating capacity up to 70,000 kilowatts per into operation, followed by a second unit in 1952. there hour. the type of fuel used is #16 (bunker c) oil. graham still was a need for something more economical with even station has at times, consumed over 100,000 gallons in more generating power. in october 1954, president one day. sketch of graham station (1957) 26 (1958) some of the interior of graham station showing part of #3 unit and the just completed #4 unit. 27 town businesses at the turn of century o’dillion turner, son of charles turner, is eighty two if anyone wanted anything there either francis or his sister years young. he was born at the head of lemon street in would dash across the street from their house, unlock the the home now owned by elvenia magee. door and take care of the customer’s needs. sometimes they’d just sit on the little porch and wait for customers or he spoke of the businesses in town during his growing they might spend time playing cards with mr. dyer (letting up years at the turn of century. him win, of course.) mrs. dyer always had homemade candy to treat the webster children, which they looked for- a number of general stores were active in town. john ward to. this small store was situated between bob smith’s kent had a business in the basement of the brick house old home and the darveau house and operated only a few across the street from the old town hall on olive street. in years. in 1959 bob had the building torn down. later years george white ran a barber shop upstairs and herbie brown ran a grocery store in the basement. after calvin turner, (no relation to o’dillion) ran a small brown’s store stopped operating, george white moved his leather and cobbler shop behind his home which was sit- barber shop downstairs and also established a pool hall in uated where the present austin moores home is on flagg there. street. calvin loved to eat green onions. he was a man who experimented with perpetual motion, who one time the former russell’s store on the corner of olive and built a very large wheel and kept it going for three days. to main has changed hands a number of times since 1900. this day no one ever guessed how mr. turner did it. a fas- cinating hobby! 1900-ike spencer 1920-sam segee “dilly” as he is better known and his wife, elizabeth michelson now reside in a small white frame house directly across fred white from the reondo farms stables on the main road in blake & berle moores t& k orono. mickey russell jerry turner (run by bertha king) a blacksmith had a shop on the southerly side of the eleanor and eugene mccaffrey present earl flanders property on the main road. walter libby apparently this enterprise was not in existence too many years. i could not find any information about the propri- back in the mid 1900’s ai gilman operated a store etor. which was located on the lawn of the old town hall near james woodsum’s home. he sold meats, groceries, ice in the late 1800’s there were several cooper shops cream and candy. these commodities were purchased operating in veazie. (a cooper was a man who made bar- wholesale in bangor. mr. gilman hauled his supplies from rels.) bill finley ran the ’hen coop’ as it was called, in the bangor to veazie by horse and wagon. al always had an block where tinkham’s home sits (lemon, flagg street and old corn cob pipe in the corner of his mouth, upside down. main road.) in the early 1900’s a fire of unknown origin i understand that leslie vanaken worked for ai part time destroyed this business. bill jordan remembers one of the when he was a young boy. pupils running into school and yelling, ’billy finley’s hen coop is on fire!' by that time it had burned completely, mike sullivan ran a general store up at ’patty’s knoll,' never to be rebuilt. other cooper shops were located on which was on the corner of oak and school street. it was judson and lemon street, (lower corner toward river,) located in what is now an apartment house. shore road, upper part of olive street near the home of jerome chase, the so-called bijou cottage. (the name in 1948-1950 jimmy russell ran a store where bijou cottage originated from actress lillian may antoine normand bacon jr’s home is now. the store was in the and her actor husband edward bulles who retired from the front and he lived in the back. kick-a-poo indian show and returned to veazie to live.) the cooper shop on olive and rock streets was run by about 1911 or 1912 andrew dyer had a small general augustus marden. store located up on the turn near where in the 1930’s frank marden, a crippled rag and metal consumer’s oil used to be. deliveries were made with junk dealer, had a business at the end of thompson road a horse and cart to the surrounding areas. while he was on school street (tsoulas house.) a resident told me that a out delivering he’d have francis webster and his sister group of children would go in and sell their rags or junk eleanor watch his store. they had a key to the premises so metal. while they were being paid, one kid would sneak 28 in the back door, steal back the junk and re-sell it to him tion’ which housed dancing, gambling, and ’hell raising!' at a later time. i understand that this was a common occur- the original main house is still standing. both the everett rence. house and the livery stable ceased to operate in the early 1900’s. the g. m. fogg remedy company was located on state street in the former general veazie home in the early in the 1920’s, charles e. turner had a blacksmith and 1900’s. the so-called factory was located in the barn carpenter shop on the corner of lemon and flag street. he which has been torn down in recent years. george fogg had an old horse named ’ned.' once or twice a day bottled a clear liquid and sold it for every ache and pain, charles would turn ’ned’ loose whereupon the horse (even for horses.) he used to ride everywhere, including would travel up flagg street to olive street and proceed up outlying areas, in his ’medicine wagon,' (wearing his black olive to the watering trough. he’d take his fill of water and derby.) one resident gave me an old quote connected with return back home the same route, never going astray. this remedy: ’forty sips, forty cents.' the business ceased operations around 1910. the pumpkin tavern, (located directly across from the present sweeney’s restaurant,) was operating in the early in the late 1800’s a livery stable run by jim o’brien, 1800’s. its name pumpkin tavern, originated from the was located on the corner of rock and olive streets, (site pumpkin sign hanging over the entrance. this was the only of the present home of grace and normand bacon.) a tavern on the so-called orono road for many years. in the thriving business, he catered to the patrons of the everett 1830’s a driver named samuel perry from china, maine house, which sat on the westerly corner of rock and olive was reportedly murdered near pumpkin tavern. peleg and streets, (home now owned by waldo ’coke’ jordan.) the nathaniel hathorn, and jeremiah legg were tried in livery stable of course, has long since been torn down. municipal court and released because of lack of evidence. a one hundred dollar reward was offered by the aldermen the everett house was an inn of sorts. an attached barn for the apprehension of the murderer. later samuel perry on the back of the jordan home was torn down in 1953. i showed up in massachusetts very much alive. understand that this particular barn was a ’red light sec- 29 located on olive street at turn of century. al gilman’s store (about 1920) was situated on lawn of old town hall. picture shows dr. bayard, dick crocker and ai gilman. francis (“pete”) webster relaxing at home. 30 everett house (1895) corner of rock and olive street. former everett house as it looks today. barn was torn down in 1953. 31 1892 the “little” school - rock street this building was torn down about 1950. 32 morris canoe at the turn of the century bert morris ran a canoe shop. large piece of burlap fully filled with straw was wrapped it was situated in the back of his home (later owned by and tied securely around the canoe. they were then care- charles b. king,) behind the present market on olive fully loaded on a wagon and hauled by horse down to the street. school street railroad station which was located near the tracks in the area where central maine storage is now the building was four stories high. raw materials located. were processed on the first floor and then were moved to each floor as each stage was completed, eventually reach- “bunny” lancaster and “pete” webster both told me ing the finishing room on the fourth floor. moving the that one of the leblanc boys employed at morris canoe materials (and finished canoes) from floor to floor was han- made them each a pair of skis. this was done by heating dled by men carrying it up the stairs for each process. after up the wood, curving it, and shaping it. the canoes had dried in the finishing room on the fourth floor, they were carried down the stairs and outside for a fire caused by arson in 1920 destroyed morris shipping. even though the canoes were light weight, it canoe leaving about seventy five men unemployed. the must have been a tedious process using the stairs day after business was never rebuilt. the arsonist was caught and day. punished. soon the morris canoe expanded and moved to the i was told that the art of making the morris canoes property now called stucco lodge on state street, leaving was eventually turned over to the old town canoe. this the first building for storage. they had several long build- was done by the morris canoe employees spending days ings, some of them three stories high, with the different and weeks working and teaching the employees at the old canoe building “steps” in each building. the larger build- town canoe shop until the process was thoroughly digest- ing in front was the office. ed. even though i am not a canoe enthusiast, i understand the craftsmanship in these canoes,is still superb. these canoes were shipped all over the world. each finished canoe was carefully wrapped to avoid damage. a former site of morris canoe co. now known as stucco lodge. 33 clish’s this home was originally a parsonage at the turn of in the mid 1930’s he built the overnight cabins charging a the century. a captain harvey bought the property and nominal fee to stay there. he always had new bills to pay began operating a filling station in the early 1920’s. at that his customers their change. time gasoline was selling for ten gallons for only one dol- lar. about 1932 arthur clish purchased the property. he mr. clish was also the assistant postmaster at the added cigars and cigarettes to the shelves in his gas station. bangor post office. clish’s as you see it today. james mooney, owner. 34 eddington ferry in the late 1800’s and early 1900’s the eddington ferry the river to the veazie side. there were three landings in was a busy means of transportation. if anyone wanted to veazie back in the 1800’s but two were discontinued leav- cross the river, they would go down to the ferry landing on ing only the one operating at ash cove. either side and blow a horn left hanging up on a rope. the operator, george davis, who lived on rock street, would george bell told me that years ago a group of boys respond with the ferry. in veazie used to go down to the ferry landing and wait for the boys from eddington to come over on the ferry, pum- on the eddington side there were steps with a mel them with rocks, often ending up in fist fights. wooden rail leading down to the landing. these steps and landing were located near the area where a brook runs in later years victor gordon operated the ferry. both under the old main highway and empties in the penobscot. he and george davis sold candy, tobacco and cigarettes, there was a small building there on the shore near the in those little houses on the landings, in between their ferry landing dock. there were no steps on the veazie side; only runs. a path. there was a landing dock and a small building there too. the landing on the veazie side was located just bill jordan recalls that when he moved to veazie he northeast of the dump near what was called ash cove. had a young heifer to transport. he hauled the heifer down this was near the so-called “big pine tree". the tree still the steps to the ferry landing, hobbled the cow’s legs and stands. both landings were located below where the pulled the animal into the bateau and made the crossing to veazie hydro is today. veazie. upon reaching the veazie side he pulled the heifer out of the boat onto the landing, freed her legs and went the ferry cable was housed in a cable crib on the on his way, towing the heifer behind him. side of the bank up overhead. this cable stretched across this bateau is smaller in size but built similar to the so-called eddington ferry. 35 watering trough ike spencer in front of his store. dick crocker sitting on step. in 1900 a watering trough was located at the head of the warrant for town meeting march 1928 olive street. it sat in the center of the road in front where contained the following article: the present market sits today. the trough was a solid gran- article #41 - (“to see if the town will vote to remove ite mass with a hole chiseled out of the middle to hold the the watering trough from it’s present location and reset water. someone always kept it filled. this piece of art it on the town hall lawn or abolish it entirely,”) weighed tons! the town voted to “lay it on the table for one year.” i the trough sat in the spot until the early 1930’s when checked the town records thoroughly but never found any it was towed away down to the vicinity of the so-called authorization to remove the trough. prouty farm near the river. it has disappeared and no one “coke” jordan said the “measure of boy to a man” was seems to know what happened to it. children were known made when he could jump across the watering to write dirty words on it as fast as it was cleaned. young trough...wonder how many of them got wet before they men rode their cars ’round and ’round it until finally it was accomplished this feat? removed. 36 hay scales over the years a number of articles appeared in the the scales consisted of a long wooden platform raised town warrants to build a set of hay scales. as early as up from a concrete foundation. the weighing section was march 1872, article #6 read: centrally located in a wooden enclosure built on one side of the platform. when a wagon drove up on the slightly “to see if the town will vote to build a set of hay scales suspended platform the foreman would weigh it in. i’m and vote to raise money for same.” told that whoever was appointed sealer of weights and measures usually tended to the weighing process. finally, in march 1921, the town voted to raise two hundred dollars to purchase and install the scales. the the scales and platform were in such bad disrepair by selectmen were to decide on the location and make the 1930’s, they were removed. in the 1960’s lou silver arrangements for “management of scales.” was hired to remove the concrete foundation because of frost heaves in the road. the scales were built and installed by charles e. turner near the corner of flagg and lemon street half on the road close by the property now owned by austin moore. mount hope ave. roadside stand—1937 in the spring of 1937 edwin kent put up roadside stands selectmen had no authority to remove the stand. this was on both sides of mount hope avenue near state street. at in march. by may, the selectmen had found some author- first, he built the southerly one on bangor land but the city ity and asked mr. kent to have the stands removed. he had the state troopers ask him to move it, which he did. evaded two deadlines to do so. the city of bangor was still not satisfied. the city manager complained to the veazie selectmen about how the stand in july, the city manager complained again and this is was in the roadway and detracted from the beauty of the the last we hear of the issue. cemetery. he asked who had been so beknighted to give kent a permit to build it. mention is made in other records for new stands built in 1940. roadside stands on mount hope avenue seem to the chairman of the veazie selectmen wrote back a have been an institution. (information from letters in town polite terse letter explaining that veazie did not have an files 1936-1938 under w. and book 6 contracts, page ordinance requiring a permit to erect such a stand. the 303) 37 located on main road. now owned by lou silver’s inc. r. w. naugler pit (1949 or 1950) in the 1940’s, reginald naugler ran a business at the mrs. william landy, owned land down to the river. gravel upper end of main road. this consisted of a gravel pit and was plentiful there so mrs. landy sold this product to the construction equipment. in 1958 lou silver purchased the city of brewer. when the river froze over in the winter you business and property from naugler. mr. silver began the would see a number of huge sleds being pulled by horse slow process of filling the very large hole left on the prop- teams crossing the ice from brewer to veazie to pick up the erty by the former owner. he now utilizes this spot for his gravel. brewer would haul all their needed gravel on one truck parking. it also has made the property more present- particular day. that must have made an interesting day for able to the eye. a child spectator. speaking of gravel, here’s an interesting story... jessie jessie now resides in her grandmother’s home on state fraser told me that in the early 1900’s her grandmother, street. 38 the old veazie railroad the first passenger railroad service in new england was name was then changed to the bangor, old town and begun in 1836 between bangor and old town. milford railroad-more commonly known, even today as the veazie railroad. after veazie’s death in 1868, the in 1832 the maine legislature granted a charter to the stockholders voted to sell the road to the european and old town railway company. this company surveyed a north american railway. the last train ran in june 1870. roadbed along the river, started building but, due to a lack of funds, never completed the line. in 1833 the legislature in the early 1860’s the european and north american granted a charter to the bangor and piscataquis canal and railway began construction for a line from bangor to railroad company, founded by a group of men from lincoln, “plus ten miles to the mouth of the piscataquis county. these men agreed to purchase the mattawamkeag.” to help finance this venture the legisla- charter of the old town company for $50,000.00. ture, on march 24, 1864, enacted a law that the proceeds construction began anew in 1835 and the first scheduled from the sale of timber on ten townships of public land in train between bangor and old town was run in november maine be paid into the state treasury for use for the railway 1836. the train consisted of a small wooden wheeled construction. two and one eighth miles of track plus a sta- locomotive hauling converted stagecoaches for passenger tion were located in veazie. cars. on october 24, 1871, the railway finally opened the the length of the roadbed was about twelve miles. the last section to bangor. it flourished for a few years with first rails were made of wood capped with iron with leather only a minimum of passenger service. eventually it ran into straps to hold the iron in place. the trains traveled about financial difficulty and ceased operations. six miles per hour; the fare was thirty-seven and a half cents. besides passengers the trains hauled lumber, laths, in 1882, maine central railroad leased the entire oper- shingles, and clapboards from the mills along the river to ation for nine hundred and ninety nine years. in august the waterfront . in bangor. 1955, maine central railroad bought the stock of the european and north american railway, becoming the new general veazie, through a series of lawsuits, acquired owners of one hundred and fourteen miles of track and the the road in 1851 and extended the tracks to milford. the bangor station. 39 train wreck (april 1895) train wreck (april 1895) on rail section behind weed property. westbound mcrr train was 11/2 hrs. late but pro- ceeded ahead instead of pulling onto side track to await for approaching train. cause: negligence . . . 40 railroad station remnants today. railroad station (1895) school street maine central railroad bridge going from state street (by church) to the village. 41 dick crocker (1920’s) at camp with his hunting “prize." 42 veazie had three railroad crossings in the early 1900’s. two feet in diameter, painted a vivid red. the crossing ten- one is located up on the main road on the so-called der, (as mr. crocker was called,) sat in a tiny gray station veazie hill by lou silver’s garage. a second crossing was house, with a little pot belly stove, right near the crossing. located across from the ball field (which was called )ones’ when a train was due, dick would go out and lower the crossing,) and one on school street. i was told that in early pulley ("red ball” to stop the traffic. after- the train passed 1934 two men, while delivering milk to the jones farm, by he would raise the “red ball". were killed by a train on )ones’ crossing. this crossing was quickly closed off to traffic. (two white fences have been i understand dick crocker lost his leg in an accident installed on each side of the track.) with maine central railroad. this came about when his leg got pinched badly between two railroad cars that were the wooden overpass was built between 1900 and being hooked together. after much sickness and misery the 1905 to eliminate the old original crossing. it was a long leg had to be amputated. the railroad kept dick on as a drawn out affair due to the legal moves by those con- crossing tender with a small salary, so he augmented this cerned to determine who would pay what share of the cost by doing cobbler work in his spare time. of building the overpass—town, state, maine central, and bangor railway and .electric company. the greatest cost “spot” kelly and eddie foley were crossing tenders on was for the fill for the approaches as it had to be moved to the night shift. at night a lantern was hung on the red ball the spot by horse drawn dump carts. so that the traffic could see it when it was raised or low- ered. there was no crossing tender on school street in the fall of 1934, route 2 was completed, bypassing because the railroad station and agent were nearby so the the veazie village and going up to orono. before this, agent handled that particular crossing. route 2 was a dead end just above the veazie in the 1930’s a signal system was installed at the cross- congregational church. ing by lou silver’s garage. in february 1967, an oilman delivering oil on school the crossing up by lou silver’s was watched in the street was killed by a train. the town argued with maine daytime by a one-legged man named dick crocker, who central railroad that they should install warning signals lived on lower lemon street. the railroad designed a pul- but to no avail. consequently, the town ended up absorb- ley type system to halt traffic when a train was due. this ing the cost of the signals to the tune of $10,000.00 for the consisted of a large round sheet of metal approximately school street crossing. 43 electric cars about 1918 a new mode of transportation came into in the wintertime a “work” car with a plow (sometimes being. the electric cars, (or so-called trolleys,) travelled on the rotary plow) would be busy cleaning the snow and specially laid tracks leaving bangor and going north obstacles off the tracks. of course there were a number of through veazie on the old main road, proceeding to accidents..some caused by ice or possibly an automobile orono, old town, and great works and reversing direc- on the tracks. guy webster, rex bridges, and silbert tion back to bangor. vanaken had dual roles. they were motormen and also plowed in the winter months on their off hours on the old the first electric car was an open car similar to the town run...both charlie crowe and fred mason are also cable car used today in san francisco. a short time later well remembered. they changed the style to a closed car. when the style changed so did the fare, from five cents to ten cents. built the electric cars had three switch side tracks between of wood and painted yellow with numerous windows, the bangor waterworks and orono. one side track was these cars were drafty and rough riding with cold, hard, located near alvah calkin’s house. another turnout was at wooden slatted seats. the heat was electric but hardly mount hope cemetery. if the trolley was early on its run it enough to suffice on a cold winter’s day. would pull in on the side track and wait until the electric car coming from the opposite direction passed by. inside the trolley on each end there was a small cubi- cle for the motorman where he sat on a little stool facing a about 1919, the winter was very harsh and cold with a panel containing the controls by which he operated the tremendous amount of snow. one of the electric cars car. when the trolley reached the end of the line, the stalled on the track in front of john skinner’s home of state motorman simply removed himself from one end of the car street and it was a week before the work crew could get it to the opposite end and proceeded to reverse his travel out. another trolley up on main road was snowed in for direction. (a simple, sensible procedure..) two weeks when finally a group of students from the university of maine shoveled it out. outside, overhead, were the electric cables. on each post was a metal arm that extended out over the trolley the motorman performed a number of duties on his tracks to support the power cables. the trolley cables were daily route. barbara (spencer) smith told me how he deliv- made of covered copper. certain individuals were known ered the bangor daily commercial. if you were fortunate to cut the cables, roll the wire and sell it to the junk deal- enough to live right on the trolley line you had your paper er for eight cents a pound. this was a common occurrence tossed into your yard every evening. barbara said in the all along the trolley lines. winter her father would stand out and watch to see where the paper landed for fear that it would get buried in the the motorman, dressed in his dark blue serge suit and snow until spring! he also left a large bundle of papers at cap collected fares. this, quite often was a long drawn out the grocery store for customers living further away from the affair because he would spend time conversing and line. “kibitzing” with the passengers. he carried a money changing device on the front of his person secured with a when jim spencer died in the winter of 1923, the belt type arrangement for anyone who needed the correct whole funeral procession, (including the deceased,) board- change. ed the trolley and rode to mount hope cemetery. from the trolley, the casket was hauled in to the tomb by horse and the trolley stops were marked with white bands on the sled to await spring burial. light posts but the motorman would usually make a stop anywhere you happened to be. often the children would jump on the trolley’s cow catcher at the grocery store in the village and ride up to the at 5:00 a. m. the first electric car of the day would wooden bridge. when they reached the bridge some one leave bangor to go to old town and the last one at night would reach up overhead and lift the trolley arm off the would return to bangor at 1:30 a. m. these trolley cars cable, stopping the trolley. the motorman would chase off were all housed in what was called the electric car barn the children, attach the trolley arm to the cable again and located on lower main street in bangor where the present be on his way. the older boys often “stole” a free ride bangor hydro garage is today. (everything seemed so when they were coming home late at night from bangor or uncomplicated and simple as compared to this day and orono. age with diesels and jets...) 44 by 1941 the electric cars stopped the old town run think back to these wonderful times and, no doubt, wish and by 1946 all trolley cars had ceased operations. that they had the opportunity to ride them again. anyone who has had the pleasure of riding the trolley will bangor street railway company (1920’s) (1930) work car and snowplow 45 electric car barn on outer main street in bangor. winter (about 1919) “bert” vanaken in uniform. motorman on electric cars on the run from bangor to old town. 46 schools there were several schools in veazie over the years. meeting, article #31 read: one was located on the shore road in the so-called prouty “voted that the selectmen sell the outhouses at the development, one on chase road on or near the old dr. school house” thomas residence, later owned by robert cobb. no infor- another inconvenience slowly passes by. mation could be found on this school except on a map published by comstock and cline in 1875 showing a small april 1906, maude davis was sworn in as superintend- square marked school. i did find in the town minutes of ent of schools for the town of veazie. march 1874 that the town voted to sell the school house and lot on the chase road. an old 1820 map of veazie march 1911, article #30 read: from the history of penobscot county, 1882, shows a “to see if the town will vote to locate a pump outside of school that was located near where the stucco lodge sits the line of the mrs. a. s. veazie estate and on said town today. property and take water from the well of said mrs. veazie’s estate near the line of said school lot for the use of said in march 1854, the town minutes mentions “assem- school scholars all expense for fencing and pump to be bling at the brick school house near joel prouty’s land.” borne by the town and maintained by them and no charges the 1875 comstock & cline map shows a parcel of land to be made for use of water by the mrs. a. veazie estate.” owned by joel prouty located on the corner of maple and lemon street about where joseph king, jr. lives now. the town voted to raise twenty five dollars for same. there’s no way of knowing if this was the site of that par- ticular brick school house or not. in 1924, the town voted seventy eight yeas and fifty nays to build a fifty seven foot by thirty eight foot school the “little” school on rock street was situated next to which had four school rooms with thirty five pupils to a waldo “coke” jordan’s home. it had three grades and one room. this allowed sixteen square feet of floor space for teacher. john davis who went to the primary school tells each pupil, plus wardrobes, modern heat, sanitation and me that his class had seven pupils. his teacher was lil two separate stairwells, one for the boys and one for the kelliher who lived on merrick street at the time. this girls. the town borrowed $18,000.00 on a temporary note school stopped operating when the new school was built. and the issuance of school bonds to redeem the note in it was converted to a residence and rented several times to twenty years. building committee members who were different young couples and about 1950 it was condemned appointed were: w. burt o’connor, john b. skinner and and torn down. you can still see some of the stone rem- ernest frazier. nants of the foundation there now, overgrown with brush. in march 1925, the town voted to raise twenty-five dol- “bunny” lancaster went to the grammar school from lars for display of the flag on the new schoolhouse. 1911 to 1919. the school had two rooms and three teach- ers, one being the principal when a class graduated from late president and benefactor, john r. graham and his this school all of them had to know how to read and write. son, president edward graham of the bangor hydro “bunny” recalls how each student upon graduating from electric company, through their generosity, donated elementary school was required to take a state exam in $10,000.00 toward the construction of the new wooden order to qualify for high school. two story frame school house. (a most generous monetary gift.) in march 1929, the town voted to call the veazie a note of humor ...out in back of the school were two school the john r. graham school; today it is still called privys, one for the boys and one for the girls. in between by this name. the privys stood a high wooden fence to allow privacy for both male and female. naturally the boys were always the school has had three additions built on since 1924. peeking under the fence trying to catch a glimpse of the in 1950 a section for the kindergarten and first grade was girls and “twitting” them. these outhouses were what added directly behind the wooden structure. 1956 found a you’d call “two seaters” painted red and had no heat. brick addition added on the left of the building and in think how cold it was in the winter with weather way 1962 another brick addition was added on the right side. below zero! i took note that at the march 9, 1925 town the last change came about in 1971 when the town voted 47 to build in behind the so-called kindergarten area. this in 1896 veazie decided to have a free high school. this addition is the new open complex. at the same time the experiment in small town secondary education lasted until second floor of the old wooden structure was removed. if 1901 when the town changed to its present system of pay- you go to see the school you will still find some of the orig- ing students’ tuition to high schools in orono or bangor. inal wooden frame structure in the front. march 1929 - “voted to purchase a piano for three hun- dred dollars, from john skinner, for the new school.” veazie grammar school (1900’s) this building was moved to where the present town hall is today and was used as a town hall. 48 john r. graham 49 john r. graham school (1970) the top floor of the school was removed in august 1971 when construction began to add the new open complex. john r. graham school (1978) 50 graduating exercises 51 diploma (1900) 52 veazie school june 10, 1897 row i: begin on left front to back - lucy buckley, blye spencer, bertie turner, alvah doane, wyatt weed row 2: from left front to back - harold buton?, clarence miller, ned stapleton, andrew johnson, ida mcphetres, sumner rich row 3: from left front to back - florence inman, frank turner, margaret (maggie) sullivan, lill ward row 4: from left front to back - maud davis, frank spencer, julia buckley, eva prouty, john buckley? veazie grammar school (1907) front row l to r: ralph drinkwater, ivan lancaster, edwin welch, grace welch, unknown, nina stanchfield, cara prouty, eddie sullivan second row l to r: lucy spencer, mildred lancaster, alice sullivan, unknown, lillian miller, unknown, marion prouty, lena prouty third row l to r: villa johnson, grace prouty, eva hathorn, helen dudley, miss seavey, (teacher,) erma crocker, flora welch, walter dwelley - fourth row l to r: earl parkhurst, fred foote, haliva doane, unknown, unknown, william dwelley, unknown, ernest leblanc, allie dwelley 53 veazie grammar school (1925) first row (near blackboard) front to back: mildred russell, charles king, john buckley, blanche smith, theron sparrow, irene pratt second row front to back: isabelle spencer, james stanchfield, james cox, carl bostrum, may welch, charles jordan, wyatt spencer third row front to back: carl spencer, beulah jordan, elvenia bell, nina benson, bernice smith, hugh campbell, clint van aken, mrs.culley. (teacher) fourth row front to back: eleanor webster, james pendleton, clair giddings, bertha sidelinker, ruth chapman, carroll turner veazie grammar school (1928 or 1929) first row (near blackboard) front to back: martha campbell, ruth spencer, unknown, unknown second row front to back: ruby avery, benjamin welch, james russell, emery sidelinker, earl smith, mary campbell third row front to back: virginia bell, margaret hersey, danny o’brien, hazel chapman, george honey, susie buckley, unknown fourth row front to back: charles spencer, hartley bell, earl vanaken, edgar smith 54 john r. graham school (1931) (1934) first row (near blackboard) l to r: bernice ellis, nelson spencer, charlene shorey, anita spencer, betty mack, barbara braley, margaret rogers second row l to r: mary jordan, douglas doane, evelyn spencer, dorothy lambert, george bell, beulah blodgett third row l to r: unknown, eugenic spencer, unknown, doris bussell, louise dwelley, walter parks? fourth row l to r: unknown, pauline smith, albert o’brien, richard jones, anna kennett, john ellis first row (near blackboard) front to back: leon vanaken, wilbur braley, lucy spurting, irving wentworth, francina gamble second row front to back, buddy rogers, raymond mckay, dorothy hollis, mary spencer, unknown, evelyn ames third row front to back: irene shorey, freeland jones, mary chapman, eleanor spencer, lois miles, lyndon sidelinker, vivian lambert fourth row front to back: eugene gamble, madeline prouty, frank jordan, elliot sidelinker, alice shorey 55 john r. graham school (1935 or 1936) melvin leighton, teacher first row (near blackboard) front to back: douglas doane, george bell, richard )ones, pauline smith, ella spencer, albert o’brien second row front to back: eleanor spencer, norman bateman, wilbur braley jr., jean mack, anna kennett, thelma bateman, evelyn spencer third row front to back: audrey bell, unknown, helen chapman, betty shorey, unknown, irving wentworth, francina gamble fourth row front to back: mary spencer, leon vanaken, lawrence ellis, raymond mckay, dorothy hollis fourth and fifth grade 1949 front row l to r: mary bell, louise olmstead, alverta spencer, lone jordan, dawn turner, mary ). osler, maureen honey, nancy chaloux second row l to r: gary beaulieu, charles watson, gary doane, leonard watson, herbert jordan, wanda russell, shirley dunham, paul rideout, louis king, mrs. ruby ruth, (teacher) third row l to r: ann meehan, clarence russell, sandra vanaken, richard dudley, lillian wilson, patricia lagerquist, marlene wert, joanne park 56 veazie girls basketball team (1933-1934) front row l to r: charlene shorey, jean mack, bernice ellis, audrey bell, betty shorey, elaine russell back row l to r: doris bussell, marguerite rogers, dorothy lambert, ella spencer, francina gamble, anita spencer, mary jordan, barbara braley. coach-teacher, melvin leighton 57 churches there were several churches functioning in veazie and fifty dollars. the story has been told that after the win- before the turn of the century. a free baptist church was dow had arrived at the veazie railroad station it was located on olive street in the former higgins home. this loaded onto a wheelbarrow and pushed up the hill to the same church later was called penobscot hall and was used church. other memorial windows were given in memory for sunday school. years later it was renamed the n.e.o.p of japheth and mary dexter, nahum and clara warren and hall, (new england order of protection.) charles jordan emma j. smith patterson. bought the property in the late 1930’s and rebuilt it into a home. the ladies aid was formed in the very early 1900’s. they were known for their fancy work, quilts, and the at the foot of olive and oak streets, on the triangle, sat superb town meeting dinners which they planned, cooked the calvinistic baptist church. the 1875 comstock and and sold to the residents who were attending the annual cline map shows a union church was in existence some- town meeting. this money was used to replenish their where in the village near the square. it probably was locat- small treasury for the needs of the church. through their ed in the former old grange hall which sat beside the pres- hard work, dedication, and donations of cash, they helped ent james woodsum home. this, in later years, was also to build the church basement and bought the steel chairs. used as the methodist church. this building as well as the they have also been major contributors to the church calvinistic baptist church, have been torn down. insurance and to special projects. they also assist in church receptions. the veazie congregational church is one of the oldest buildings in veazie. on may 22, 1837, an ecclesiastical a women’s fellowship was started in 1971. although council convened at the home of samuel valentine and only organized for a short time this group has contributed voted to organize the congregational church of north much in both time and money to church projects and its bangor. by may 20, 1844, the church records showed that general funds. the fellowship is affiliated with church there were twenty members. on march 29, 1845, the women united. besides working for the local church these church was dedicated with a sermon by reverend maltby ladies have participated in both foreign and domestic mis- and a prayer by reverend page. sionary efforts. the land upon which the church stands was deeded 1951 - veazie grange provided new steps with railings january 1, 1845 but ran into problems. john t. clark deed- and two tubs of flowers. ed it to the north bangor congregational society which 1958 - the veazie garden club landscaped the grounds was not an incorporated body and had no legal power. and donated numerous articles for the choir. upon petitioning by the business committee on 1958 - the colby memorial room was dedicated in september 4, 1903,, the supreme judicial court deemed honor of reverend rensel h. colby. that the property be conveyed to the veazie 1959 - a hammond organ was purchased with contri- congregational church. in that same year the church was butions from members and friends. 1961 - the church insured for one thousand dollars for five years at a cost of became part of the united church of christ. thirty dollars. 1972 - began construction of educational wing the church has had many students from the bangor societies in veazie theological seminary who have served as its pastors. at turn of century several have become quite distinguished in their field-to mention only a few: dr. smith baker, dr. harry trust, who pine tree no. 1326 was for many years president of bangor theological knights of honor seminary, and the rev. rensel colby. reform (temperance) club rural grange no. 207 the beautiful round memorial window in the front of patrons of husbandry the church is dedicated to the reverend smith baker who was ordained here on july 26,1860. he remained until 1868 when he left to accept the pastorate of the park street congregational church in boston. the ladies aid purchased the window in the early 1900’s for one hundred 58 pastors first congregational church of veazie 1838 to 1845 circuit pastor 1923 to 1925 frank roosevelt hamilton 1845 to 1846 rufus william emerson 1925 to 1927 sumner francis johnson 1846 to 1849 daniel smith talcott 1927 to 1931 leon arthur dean 1849 to 1858 circuit pastor 1931 to 1933 clarence walter harvey 1858 to 1867 smith baker 1933 to 1935 arthur wallace 1867 to 1868 william foster obear 1935 to 1938 raymond edward fiedler 1868 to 1886 circuit pastor 1938 to 1939 earl damon greenlaw 1886 to 1888 charles burns wathen 1939 to 1940 george stanley keast 1880 to 1890 circuit pastor 1940 to 1942 wilbur putnam parker 1890 to 1891 virgil william blackman 1942 to 1944 john peters webster, jr. 1891 to 1894 francis arthur sanborn 1944 to 1945 craig handyside richards 1894 to 1895 circuit pastor 1945 to 1947 raymond andrew michel 1895 to 1896 herbert edwin lombard 1947 to 1949 albert luther holcomb 1896 to 1897 robert robertson morson 1949 to 1952 balth hendrik adolf unger 1897 to 1900 circuit pastor 1952 to 1954 clifford cecil tobin 1900 to 1902 charles william howkins 1954 to 1956 norman levinson 1902 to 1905 edwin call brown 1956 to 1958 william r. heinrich 1905 to 1908 frederick william foote 1958 to 1961 joseph l. hedrick 1908 to 1909 stephen christian lang 1961 to 1962 samuel m. lafferty 1909 to 1911 rensel harold colby 1963 to 1964 peter a. dakers 1911 to 1912 harry trust 1964 to 1964 maynard w. hammond 1912 to 1914 robert william mcclure 1965 to 1966 richard c. ogden, jr. 1914 to 1916 frederick rudolph dixon 1966 to 1970 arthur reublinger 1916 to 1918 jesse churchill donahue 1970 to 1972 ronald haney 1918 to 1919 thomas foxall, jr. 1972 to 1975 william schraer 1919 to 1922 albert bernard kettell 1975 to 1976 william mulford 1922 to 1923 walter egbert stackpole 1976 to 1978 mrs. charlotte a. lesak 59 (1895) free baptist church and n.e.o.p. hall on olive street n.e.o.p. hall as it looks today located on olive street 60 veazie congregational church (1895) veazie congregational church (1895) memorial window dedicated to veazie congregational church today reverend smith baker wing added on in 1972 61 youth choir at veazie congregational church (1935 or 1936) directed by mrs. paul springer front row l to r: alice shorey, mary spencer, charlene shorey, hazel chapman, irene shorey, waldo robinson row two l to r: joanne springer, jackie springer, madeline prouty, ethel spencer, jenny sidelinker row three l to r: rita kennett, grace jordan, edith farley, shirley spencer, anna bussell, - murphy, betty shorey row four l to r: anna kennett, evelyn ames, francina gamble, eleanor spencer, helen chapman, evelyn carney mrs. paul springer was the daughter of mr. william picard who resided in the present lou silver home on state street 62 by the 1920’s the corporation house was aging and aid society for dishes they had stored in the town hall. inadequate. the town decided to sell it and purchase the the dishes had been destroyed by some teenagers who grange hall which stood near where the present town had broken in. this incident and a traffic accident with the hall sits. the corporation house suffered a fire in 1936 so town’s road machine impressed the town officials with the the town meetings were held for several years in the rent- need for an insurance policy on the town’s property. ed grange hall. many activities have been held in the town hall over hot debates developed over whether to buy the grange the years. the hall is kept busy with boy scout and girl hall or build a new town hall. at least eight special town scout meetings, ladies aid, legion groups, shrine sup- meetings were held on this issue. at one meeting the town pers, firemen suppers, school plays, basketball games and would vote in favor of building a town hall. a petition physical education. the hall has also been “dressed up” would be circulated and return the article to town meeting for many wedding receptions and dances too. if any resi- and the previous vote would be rescinded. this continued dent desires to use the hall, he or she must book their day all summer until finally, (in august 1938,) it was voted, or night way in advance. ninety yeas and seventy three nays, to construct the new town hall and sell the grange hall and old town hall. town meetings and public hearings are also conducted the first town meeting was held in the new building on there with the voting handled downstairs and the town march 25, 1940. meetings upstairs. (i assume that now that the new municipal building is being used, town meetings and vot- veazie was a rough and tumble town during this time. ing will no doubt be moving to this site sometime in the fights were common even at town meetings. vandalism future.) was frequent. in 1938 the town voted to repay the ladies 63 at this time the town hall is undergoing some internal march 1915 - the town voted to build a tower on the alterations. the wall between the fire bay and the old end of the town hall, (corporation house,) and place a selectmen’s office has been removed along with the back bell in same. wall of the office making one large room. two windows march 1924 - town voted that the public be allowed to have replaced the large overhead fire door. (this change ring town hall bell between the hours of twelve midnight will accommodate a new senior citizens center.) and daylight on july 4th and armistice days. april 1868 - the town voted to accept the corporation house for use as a hall and for other town purposes. corporation house view from maple street. it is now privately owned and has apartments. 64 water 1889 was a drained year for veazie but conflicts among march 1894 - voted water on chase road townspeople kept political life active. the town contract- march 1903 - voted to move hydrant on mill ed with the penobscot water and power company for street to state street in front of b. n. morris twenty years to provide fifteen hydrants and water service canoe company at a cost of six hundred and twenty five dollars per year. march 1953 - hydrant rental $1560.00 although concentrated in the village, the hydrants were oct. 1969 - accepted orono-veazie water soon installed all over town. district oct. 1971 - re-accepted water district march 1977 - hydrant rental $22,000.00 street lights in the early 1900’s toe town began to look to lighting fifteen dollars and fifty cents was raised and appropri- their streets. an agreement in 1909 was reached with the ated each year for each new light named above with bangor railway and electric company and veazie to added stipulation that the lights be on all night. there were install the following lights: thirty two street lights by 1910 and by 1919 the town voted to raise five hundred dollars for street lights “in the ensu- four lights - school street ing year.” yet, in that same year they postponed indefinite- two lights - lemon street ly to put elecrtic lights in the veazie grammar school. two lights - olive street one light - oak street by the 1940’s the town had all their streets lighted. one light - grove street 1928 -street light appropriation $605.00 one light - state street 1954 -street light appropriation $1228.94 (135 lights) - 1977 - street light appropriation $6548.00 sewers sewers were first proposed in veazie in 1915 more fifty per cent of cost borne by the town. cost: three thou- than fifty years after bangor had a complete system. a seri- sand dollars. ous study committee was not formed until 1922 and fund- 1951 - veazie sewer district was incorporated. three ed in 1923. finally, in 1924, the town voted in favor of trustees were appointed by the selectmen on staggered sewers. the village was,fully served by 1940 but much of terms. one year: clarence russell, two year: thomas the rest of the town was not receiving services up until the davis, three year: frank mack 1960’s. within the next several years all homes will be 1954 - town appropriated $7000.00 for sewer district connected for service under the new federal regulations. 1976 - town appropriated $40,500.00 for sewer district 1928 - public sewer from h.h. miller residence on state street north to lemon street, thence from lemon did you know that the first flush toilet in town was street up flagg to morris residence to penobscot river. owned by bertram king, charlie king’s father? 65 telephones a petition was presented to the town as early as june veazie in the bangor zone and set up a four party line sys- 25, 1895 by the new england telephone and telegraph for tem in veazie. a hearing to erect telephone poles and wires. on june 11, june 1907 - telephone poles and lines entire length of 1896, the town authorized the selectmen to grant them the lemon street right to erect and maintain twenty five foot poles and august 1907 - poles and wires on old river road from wires, (wires to be eighteen feet from the ground.) these a point near the thompson place to the veazie station were to be located on the highway on state street from the may 1911 - poles and wires entire length of flagg street bangor line to the orono line. by the mid 1930’s the town to green street was serviced with telephones. feb. 1917 - wires and poles on chase road from the bangor road to bangor town line. in 1948, a committee was appointed to petition the may 1931 - wires and poles on bangor-old town road new england telephone and telegraph through the public from mount hope avenue to a point one eighth of a mile utilities commission to extend rate zoning to include north of lemon street. postal services mail travels and so did the postal services in veazie. all deliveries of mail for veazie come from the bangor when ai gilman had his first store on main road, in the post office. veazie was assigned r.f.d. #7. this route home owned then by jim spencer, now owned by alvah began at forest avenue in bangor traveling to veazie up to calkins, he sold postage stamps along with his general and including kelly road, in orono, northwest on store merchandise. when he re-located in his new store on stillwater avenue and back to bangor. in 1910 alphonso the town hall lawn, he again sold postage stamps. dickson had 21.9 miles to deliver on this route. about 1950 the mailing address was changed to m.r.b. with box on april 24, 1964, a branch post office was opened numbers for each homeowner. by that time the town had and operated by james russell in russell’s store. services grown so that the bangor post office put on a mail carrier were stamps, money orders and parcel post. in later years to deliver solely to veazie. when jerry turner owned the store and bertha king ran it she continued the same postal services. this service was john skinner tells me that when he was a young boy discontinued in the early 1970’s. he remembers when alphonso “pompy” dickson deliv- ered in veazie in the winters using a horse and sleigh ...what wonderful memories of years gone by. postal employees who live or have lived in veazie samuel e. marshall, appointed veazie postmaster in edward stover late 1830’s paul mcphee nahum warren, veazie postmaster for seven years in arthur clish, asst. postmaster, bangor 1800’s alden rand alphonso dickson joseph eslin paul howard virgil leblanc 66 dump in the early 1900’s the town began to feel the need for is hoping to use this area for a park. a public dump. the first dump was located off state street behind the hathorn property which is the frank todd for many years dick prouty took care of hauling the home today. the dirt road leading to the dump was locat- town refuse and the care of the dump. after dick passed ed approximately where the denaco home is today. this away the refuse job was awarded to lou silver who han- dump closed in the 1920’s and again the town faced the dled it until 1975. refuse problem. march 1948 - “voted that the town accept mr. dick the town voted to look into providing a dump in 1930. prouty’s bid of $450.00 per year to collect dump and this one was located on the old thompson farm off prouty garbage once a week and also take care of the town drive near the river. the road is still visible. in 1935 dick dump.” prouty sold the town a parcel of land on the county road. this dump was used until 1976 when federal regulations march 1950 - “voted to accept norman prouty’s sealed prohibited open dump burning and the dump was closed. bid of $987.00 for one year for collection and disposal of since 1977 veazie has contracted to haul its refuse to the garbage and care of town dump.” new sawyer landfill in hampden at a price of six dollars a ton. march 1954 - “voted to raise and appropriate $200.00 for rat extermination at dump.” since the dump closed the town has had the land grad- ed, seeded and loamed. sometime in the future the town roads like any other town with dirt roads, veazie had its road the town voted to “lay out” twenty five dollars plus the problems too. in the spring the mud was wagon axle deep. same amount of money raised for repair of roads. some of them were almost impassable until the summer when they would dry out and then there were the ruts to by the late 1930’s veazie began to think seriously of contend with. road improvement so they began the tarring process. one year the town would raise money to tar the village roads in 1885, one of the articles in the town minutes reads and the next year another section would be tarred until, as follows: finally, all the roads were completed. in fact, in 1951, the town raised two thousand five hundred dollars for retarring “to see if the town will vote to instruct the street com- all roads. missioner to put the street commencing at lemon street and running in a southwesterly course past the house in the last few years the town has been using the of seth brann, henry ward, e.k. stuart’s store, asa b. asphalt process when a road needs to be finished. waters house and intersecting the street running between george morrill’s and samuel harmon’s house in a passable condition for teams." cemetery i went to the cemetery yesterday and was surprised to was in the 2nd maine regulars during the civil war. he find so many familiar people there. just through the gate was so proud of that fact and the action he saw it was hard was roderick park, a lumberman who lived on thompson to hold a conversation with him without some war story point he tried being a selectman a few times but didn’t cropping up. amazing how he’d slide them in on you. care for the public life. his wife is beside him. now his headstone proclaims his story. topped by a sol- dier standing with a draped flag and finished with a patri- all around were familiar names of the same era, otic verse. his patient wife lies nearby, one lily atop her mcphetres, hathorn, rollins, warren. robert mcphetres stone. 67 nahum warren is up by the fence. he was a farmer 1871 - p. 263 “voted that the undertaker publish all down on the orono road. his land is in trees now. he was deaths that occur in the town in the bangor paper. also the a selectman on and off for twenty years. before veazie undertaker shall have charge of the burying ground and if even existed he was active in bangor politics. deacon s. morris fails to keep the fence in order he shall do so and warren wrote the settlement between veazie and bangor bring in his bill to the selectmen who shall pay a reason- on the 1853 taxes, separating the two. he was proud of able compensation for it. also that the undertaker shall being a deacon of the church. it says dea. nahum warren purchase suitable weights for the small gates of the bury- on his tombstone and on his wife’s. ing ground and the town pay him for the same.” across from deacon warren is silas mcphetres. they 1874 - p.314 “voted that the undertaker shall set out often battled in town meeting but now they lie to glower at some hardwood trees in front of burying ground in said each other for eternity. town, repair and gravel walks in the ensuing year.” in the very middle of one section stands a large mono- 1875 - p.329 “voted to authorize selectmen to cause lith. from one side it says simply hattie foyer. no age, no the walks of the burying ground to be shoveled out and dates, no inscription. it speaks volumes. hattie was a graveled and that one hundred dollars be raised for the madam in town. she was married to a mr. stevens but her purpose and if any bodies lay in the walks they shall noti- second name isn’t on the monument. she would never fy their friends to remove them and if not so removed that allow her name to be changed or her age told. so, her the selectmen cause ’them to be removed into the nearest name lords it over everything, even all the others who lot not occupied.” looked on her with disrepute ...she has a respectable mon- ument and hers is the most dignified and independent. 1881 - p.428 “voted to authorize the selectmen to enlarge the graveyard and granted and raised money for isaac .spencer is buried nearby. he was a storekeeper same.” in the village. he shares a small stone with his wife. frugal even in death. 1912 - harry e. smith was paid fifty cents for burying a cat in 1909. thomas cochran was paid one dollar for hidden in trees are the earliest tombstones. they’re of burying a dog. slate. these dark watchers tell of even more ancient peo- ple. they bear the names of those who had moved on 1912 - p.543 “voted to accept money from any person before veazie became a town. like indians, a primeval or estate for the purpose of keeping lots in repair in the backdrop to later history. cemetery and the sum of money to be not less than fifty dollars and as much more as they wish to give.” the strange thing though is the stillness. all these peo- ple, so alive once, arguing over how veazie should be. 1914 - p.629 “voted to put in one faucet in the center with all the feuds these people had, this should be a noisy street of the cemetery.” place. it is so still... 1922 - “voted not to sell that part of the mcphetres different articles pertaining to the cemetery taken from place, so-called lying north of a line back of cemetery and town minutes (in safe). sand bank, said land to be advertised and sold at public 1859 - “voted that the selectmen procure runners for auction to the highest bidder, also to determine whether the hearse.” (i assume it means runners for the snow.) said land shall be sold with or without right-of-way to main road.” 1859 - “voted that the town raise fifty dollars for the repair of fences and gates around the burying ground and 1953 - “voted to sell house lot from cemetery property that the selectmen contact someone for same.” to e. j. foley for two thousand dollars.” 68 around the corner around the corner i have a friend, in this great city that has no end. yet days go by and weeks rush on, and before i know it a year is gone. and i never see my old friend’s face, for life is a swift and terrible race. he knows i like him just as well, as in the days when i rang his bell and he rang mine. we were younger then, and now we are busy, tired men. tired with playing a foolish game, tired with trying to make a name; “tomorrow,” i say, “i will call on jim, just to show that i’m thinking of him. “but tomorrow comes and tomorrow goes, around the corner yet miles away, “here’s a telegram, sir, jim died today.” and that’s what we get and deserve in the end, around the corner, a vanished friend... author unknown sextons of veazie cemetery 1859 to 1860 william spurr 1918 to 1919 osgood sidelinker 1860 to 1872 john b. durgin 1920 frank spencer 1873 freeman rollins 1921 osgood sidelinker 1874 william spurr 1922 to 1926 joseph p. dudley 1875 dennis o’brien 1927 frank spencer, joseph dudley 1876 dennis o’brien, edwin hathorn 1928 to 1930 joseph dudley 1877 to 1885 edwin hathorn 1931 to 1935 charles goode 1886 g.b. marden 1936 to 1937 kaloe googins 1887 to 1890 silas hathorn 1938 kaloe googins, charles spencer 1891 ingerson doane 1939 to 1941 charles spencer 1892 to 1909 silas hathorn 1942 charles spencer, j.e. meehan 1910 to 1911 osgood sidelinker 1943 douglas a. doane 1912 - harry smith 1944 to 1962 john e. meehan 1913 to 1914 osgood sidelinker 1963 john meehan, alvin myers 1915 samuel j. wentworth 1964 allan b. calkins 1916 frank spencer 1965 to 1973 robert watson 1917 charles turner 1974 to 1977 alvin myers 69 police veazie, since its inception, has always had constables. alvah was born on january 18, 1912, in orono in the off and on over the years, the town alternated between house built by his father, next to the gass stables. he has electing them or having them appointed by the selectmen. resided in veazie for forty five years. in june 1937, he mar- ried amy (fernald) calkins from frankfort, maine. the nothing in the old town minutes (for the 1800’s), indi- have two grown children, allan b. and ann b. calkins. cates that they were paid. maybe they offered their servic- es in lieu of paying a tax or another town debt. regardless, the town, in 1977 voted to buy a police cruiser and in it was no doubt, menial pay. by 1900 the minutes did that same year three part time constables were appointed show that the town began to pay a small fee for these and recently a fourth man was added. services. march 1903 - annual constable salary $13.00 in 1977 alvah b. calkins was recognized by the town march 1916 - annual constable salary $10.00 for this twenty eight years of dedicated service as a consta- march 1928 - annual constable salary $30.00 ble. he received a plaque with an inscription, and his two badges, (constable and police,) mounted on it. alvah calkins on his way to work. 70 constables 1853 - roderick park, abram jaquith, asa c. palmer, 1882 - g.b. marden, r. p. hathorn, a.h. gilman, a.j. thomas o. additon spencer 1854 - nahum warren, abram rollins, roderick r. park, 1883 - e.m. merrick, w.j. low, g.b. marden sewall chapman, jr., danforth clark 1884 - alfred page, g.b. marden, john durgin, j.p. 1855 - roderick r. park, danforth l. clark, stillman dudley moulton 1885 - gustavus marden, albert dwelley, warren prouty 1856 - d.l. clark, d.w. dickey, j.c. rollins, sewall 1886 - g.b. marden, alfred page, lewis park, john chapman, jr., levi blodgett mccarty 1857 - d.l. clark, amos phillips, levi blodgett, william 1887 - fred d. spencer, l. park, g.b. marden, john h. dorr, william spurn o’brien 1858 - john h. phillips, d.l. clark, david w. dickey, 1888 - g.b. marden, john stapleton, albert f. dwelley levi blodgett, albion morris, john thompson 1889 - g.b. marden, ingerson h. doane, lewis h. park 1859 - d.l. clark, levi blodgett, otis hewey, albion 1890 - g.b. marden, h.h. sproul, l.h. park, j.p. dudley morris, s. chapman, )r., s.j. hathorn 1891 - c.e. perkins, d. sparks, warren prouty, chas. h. 1860 - albion morris, frank mcphetres, d.l. clark, s.j. dudley hathorn, michael sullivan, b.f. linnell, otis hewey, levi 1892 - b.c. seavey, o.d. winchester, john stapleton blodgett, sewall chapman, j.h. shepley 1861 - mark 1893 - n.h. cook, b.c. seavey, william thompson, r.p. thompson, p.h. spencer, levi blodgett, william spurr, hathorn samuel j. hathorn 1894 - william e. swears, frank dudley, g.b. marden 1862 - levi blodgett, otis hewey, william dorr, william 1895 - john e. kent, william e. swears, seavey door spurr, samuel j. hathorn, samuel l. morris 1863 - otis 1896 - william e. swears hewey, samuel hathorn, william thompson, isiah m. 1897 - william e. swears, john h. o’brien, m.e. buckley davis, andrew j. stockwell 1898 to 1903 - william e. swears 1864 - otis hewey, levi blodgett, a.d. chase 1904 - george sullivan, william e. swears 1865 - james dwelley, levi blodgett, s.l. morris, s.j. 1905 - william e. swears hathorn, william dorr 1906 - william e. swears 1866 - levi blodgett, s.j. hathorn, william thompson, 1907 - warren prouty, william e. swears otis hewey, j.w. decter, jr. 1908 - william e. swears 1867 - levi blodgett, s. morris, samuel j. hathorn, 1909 - william e. swears, a.r. page wilder page 1910 - alfred r. page, william e. swears 1911 - m.r. 1868 - d.w. dickey, j.n. shaw, s. hersey crocker, joseph dudley 1912 - leonard lambert, james parks 1869 - otis hewey, john n. shaw, william dorr 1913 - james parks, edwards o’brien, frank b. robins, 1870 - levi blodgett, s.j. hathorn, william dorr, thomas joseph p. dudley callanan 1914 -joseph p. dudley, b.l. king, l.e. lambert, james 1871 - mark thompson, charles j. norton, david w. parks dickey 1915 - bert l. king, joseph p. dudley, alvah h. towle 1872 - wilder page, mark thompson, samuel j. hathorn, 1916 - joseph p. dudley, bertram l. king, alvah h. towle g.b. marden, ansel g. emery 1917 - joseph p. dudley, bertram l. king 1873 - levi blodgett, wilder page, g.b. marden 1918 - roy a. ellis, thomas davis, bertram l. king 1874 - otis hewey, george morrill, wilder page, henery 1919 - joseph p. dudley, bertram l. king j. davis, gustavus b. marden 1920 - bertram king, edward m. bulles 1875 - levi blodgett, g.b. marden, otis hewey, mark 1921 - joseph p. dudley, norman prouty thompson, thomas callanan 1922 - wyatt spencer, charles inman, jr. 1876 - levi blodgett, samuel hathorn, james s. 1923 - wyatt spencer, charles inman, jr. ellingwood, frank s. brown, g.b. marden 1924 - joseph p. dudley, bertram l. king 1877 - daniel k. hammond, andrew ). mcphetres, 1925 - william jordan, joseph p. dudley andrew r. smith 1926 - william jordan, joseph p. dudley 1878 - a.j. mcphetres, thomas callanan, levi blodgett, 1927 - harold wentworth, frank dwelley a.r. smith 1928 - peter bostrum, harold wentworth 1879 - g.b. marden, levi blodgett, a.). mcphetres, 1929 - charles inman, jr., ralph e. shorey eldridge parkhurst, john stapleton 1930 - charles inman, jr., harold wentworth, 1880 - levi blodgett, e.g. parkhurst, g.b. marden, john francis murray e. kent, s. j. hathorn, thomas callanan 1931 - clarence perkins, harold wentworth, james 1881 - john e. kent, a.g. emery, john mccarty parks 71 1932 - peter bostrum 1950 - frank jordan, alvah doane, alvah calkins, 1933 - peter bostrum, clinton vanaken george bell 1934 - peter bostrum, clinton vanaken 1951 to 1952 - alvah calkins, douglas doane, alvah 1935 - peter bostrum, clinton vanaken doane 1936 - leonard lambert, harold wentworth 1953 - alvah calkins, bertrand lane, alvah doane 1937 - leonard lambert, harold wentworth 1954 to 1956 - alvah doane, alvah calkins, douglas 1938 - harold wentworth, clinton vanaken doane 1939 - harold wentworth, harry smith 1957 to 1958 - alvah calkins, harold kennett, ralph 1940 - harold wentworth, harry smith, carroll ellis parks, douglas doane, rodney bragdon (special) 1959 - alvah calkins, harold kennett, ralph parks, 1941 - harold wentworth, harry smith, carroll ellis douglas doane, george bell, rodney bragdon (special) 1960 - alvah calkins, ralph parks, george bell, donald 1942 - harold wentworth, harry smith, carroll ellis perry (special) 1961 - alvah calkins, ralph parks 1943 - harold wentworth, harry smith, roy seber, 1962 to 1966 - ralph parks, alvah calkins, george bell carroll ellis, george harthorne (special) 1967 to 1969 - wilbur braley, ralph parks, alvah 1944 - george hathorne, harold wentworth, harry calkins, george bell e. smith 1970 - alvah calkins, george bell 1945 - harold wentworth, george hathorne, alvah 1971 to 1972 - alvah calkins, wilbur braley, george bell h. doane 1973 to 1976 - alvah b. calkins, george bell 1946 - harold wentworth, alvah h. doane 1977 - george bell, (chief), cathy jordan, alvah b. 1947 - robert l. clark, harold kennett, alvah doane calkins, frank w. jordan 1948 - harold kennett, alvah doane, frank jordan 1978 - george bell (chief), vito fratello, tyler dunning, 1949 - frank jordan, alvah calkins, alvah doane joseph friedman, steve monroe 72 veazie police department left to right, seated: town manager curtis lunt, chief george r. bell. standing: steve monroe, tyler dunning, vito fratello, joseph friedman. 73 fire department in 1903 there were two hose houses in veazie. one three lieutenants, sixteen regulars and four junior mem- was located in the triangle at the foot of oak and olive bers. street. the other one was situated on merrick street approximately where the earl parks home is today. the following articles are taken at random from origi- nal town records in safe. by the year 1927 the hose house was located in the old school building (where. the present town hall is today.) a march 1854 - “voted that the town pay the members large opening for a fire door was cut on one end of the of the engine company seventy-five dollars for the flag building and a ramp was added to house the new fire truck staff and other utensils that belong to said company.” veazie had purchased a few years before. march 1893 - “voted to raise forty two dollars to pur- when the town hall was built in 1938, the plans chase twelve rubber coats for the fire company, same included a bay for the fire truck. a new fire truck was pur- coats to be purchased by the chief engineer. also chased in the 1940’s. voted to raise ninety two dollars for ladders, trucks, etc.” in the present new fletcher municipal building there are three fire bays, of which two of them house fire equip- march 1899 - “voted to buy the robert farris property ment. on oak hill and establish a hose house there.” in november 1950, veazie organized a volunteer fire march 1911 - fire chief - annual pay fifteen dollars department with twenty seven members. (town popula- tion was six hundred people at that time.) twelve members march 1912 - “voted to sell the robert farris place so- had their hats and badges; more were outfitted later. the called and reserve a corner lot on school and merrick money was raised through town merchants and a fireman’s street to put the hose house on with the condition that dance. training sessions consisted of weekly movies, the house be taken down and removed.” speakers from the larger communities, and actual practice with the town’s equipment which included a five hundred march 1913 - one hundred fifty feet of fire hose $94.50 gallon pumper on a chevrolet chassis. nozzles $22.00 on may 14, 1968, the veazie fire fighter association march 1926 - “voted to. raise seventy five dollars for was organized. this included seven experienced firemen. fire extinguishers and ash cans for school.” today there are approximately twenty-six members which include one chief, one assistant fire chief, one captain, march 1947 - insurance on fire truck $51.00 74 one of veazie’s first fire houses at foot of oak street in early 1900’s. building has long since been torn down. fire department 1854 - s.s. fish, eli weston, j.a. boyington 1871 - james l. dwelley, ansel g. emery, nathan 1855 - b.r. dickey, ira boynton, william dorr marden 1856 - eli weston, b.r. dickey, william h. dorr 1872 - ingerson doane, wilder page, llewellyn 1857 - l.l. morris, a.c. palmer, william h. dorr ellingwood, william ward, nathan marden 1858 - d.m. davis, j. grover, william h. dorr 1873 - ingerson doane, john kearns, nathan s. 1859 - nathan marden, s.l. morris, joseph c. marden robinson 1874 - nathan marden, wilder page, ingerson 1860 - john a. marden, s.l. morris, joseph shepley doane 1875 - john kent, nathan marden, john l. rollins 1861 - n.l. marden, joseph shepley, s. morris 1876 - wyatt weed, p.h. davis, henery ward, john 1862 - joseph shepley, n.l. marden, james turner, b. skinner samuel morris 1877 - william h. ward 1863 - joseph h. shepley, william spurr, nathan 1878 - william h. ward, ansel emery, benjamin marden collins 1864 - joseph shepley, william spurr 1879 - n.s. marden, william h. ward, ingerson 1865 - john a. marden, e.b. marden, william doane dorr 1880 - n.s. marden, i.h. doane, w.h. ward 1866 - nathan l. marden, james b. sproul, joseph h. 1881 - ingerson doane, r.t. hathorn shepley 1882 - i.h. doane, william thompson 1867 - n.s. marden, george moore, j.s. dwelley, 1883 - john s. kent, n.l. marden, fred spencer, wilbur page john buckley 1868 - jefferson peabody, asa- b. waters, wilder 1884 - ingerson doane, w.j. low page 1885 - ingerson doane 1869 - wilder page, mark thompson, william kent 1886 - ingerson doane 1870 - wilder page, n.s. marden, james merrick, 1887 - ingerson doane john a. marden 1888 - william h. ward, ingerson doane 75 1889 - ingerson doane 1921 - charles inman 1890 - charles h. dudley, ingerson doane 1922 - charles inman, sr. 1891 - ingerson doane 1923 - charles e. goode, edward bulles, charles 1892 - ingerson doane inman 1893 - fred sproul 1924 - charles e. goode 1894 - roderick p. hathorn 1925 - william n. jordan 1895 - fred sproul 1926 - william jordan 1896 - lewis c. inman 1927 - william n. jordan 1897 - calvin inman 1928 - william n. jordan 1898 - lewis c. inman 1929 to 1942 - harry e. smith 1899 - thomas inman (chief), fred sproul, william 1943 - william n. jordan swears, r.p. hathorn 1944 - harry e. smith 1900 - thomas inman 1945 - norman j. prouty 1901 - charles c. inman 1946 - norman j. prouty 1902 - charles c. inman 1947 - norman j. prouty 1903 - not recorded 1948 - norman prouty 1904 - charles c. inman 1949 to 1954 - george bell 1905 - charles c. inman 1955 - joseph b. king, sr. 1906 - a.c. weston 1956 to 1959 - douglas doane 1907 - p.h. davis 1960 - freeland jones 1908 - charles inman 1961 - freeland jones 1909 - lewis c. inman 1962 to 1966 - george bell 1910 - arthur weston 1967 - douglas a. doane 1911 - charles inman 1968 - douglas a. doane 1912 - charles inman 1969 - daniel fletcher 1913 - selden hewey 1970 - george bell, frank jordan (asst.) 1914 - charles inman 1971 - george bell, bruce kigas (asst.) 1915 - b.l. king (chief), charles inman, edward 1972 - george bell, alvin myers (asst.) lynch 1973 - freeland jones, george bell, richard jones 1916 - charles inman (chief), edward bulles (asst.) 1917 - charles inman (chief), edward bulles 1974 - daniel fletcher, dennis honey (asst.) 1918 - charles dwelley 1975 - daniel fletcher, donald hillman, dennis 1919 - edward bulles honey (asst.) 1920 - edward bulles 1976 - donald hillman, dennis honey (asst.) 1977 - donald hillman, dennis honey (warden) 76 recreation the penobscot river, penobscot means “rocky river," or deer weren’t as plentiful in veazie until about 1925, the “descending ledge place," is the longest river in the then there seemed to have been a great abundance of state. years ago the river was very clean. fishing was plen- them. “bunny” lancaster tells me that the former clish’s tiful with pickerel, trout, perch, bass and salmon. many a gas station located near the congregational church on young boy spent his time down on the river bank with a state street was swamped with tagging the deer kill ...sixty sapling cut for a fishing pole, a string and some type of five in one season! there’s no way of knowing if they were hook on the end hoping to catch a fish or two. what a thrill all shot in veazie. when they caught one! (of course the fish was a food source too.) john skinner’s father used to go down to the recreation was nil in veazie. children either worked river and spear a couple salmon for their sunday dinner. (for mere pennies) or made their own enjoyment. they’d roll hoops, play on the push car or aggravate the motor- the young people in veazie had their own “swimmin’ man on the trolley. holes.” one was called “sandy” and it was located in behind and above lou silver’s pit. the other place was john davis mentions the weekly prize fights on chase called “big rock." this was located down by the watson road in the 1920’s. a makeshift boxing ring was set up in home. there was a drowning at “big rock” years ago the field where the present homes of william demaso and which frightened the children away for a long time, but eric hake now sit. this “enterprise” even had a seating they eventually overcame their fear and returned to the arrangement. john and bill fleming would be at the “gate” spot. they’d spend hour after hour at this free summer and collect admission and pocket the money. john skinner sport ...somelearning to swim, some getting a burn or a said he used to climb up on a nearby haystack and watch suntan. the whole fighting match free of charge! rabbits and partridge were plentiful for hunting. archie in the town minutes in 1854, page twenty five, the spencer and fred doane were two residents who also town voted that the selectmen be instructed to request j.h. hunted fox. george carson and jim spencer were trappers. and a. phillips to regard the law relative to minors and they trapped fox, coon and skunks. skins brought in twen- other “rooling” on the bowling alley and keeping the alley ty five cents each except if you were lucky enough to get open unlawful hours. a curious article ...can you imagine a skunk skin with a rich black color and a narrow white a bowling alley back at that time? of course, there’s no stripe, then the price jumped to fifty cents for that particu- way of getting any information on the location of this par- lar skin. i guess the narrow stripe was more becoming to ticular bowling alley. the furrier and no doubt, was a better selling item. 77 veazie giants (1934 or 1935) front row l to r: carroll stevens, walter parks, albert spencer, joseph king, sr., waldo jordan back row l to r: charles spencer, clinton vanaken, frank honey, selwyn treadwell, stuart hodgeman, herbert leblanc veazie giants picture taken in 1938 front row l to r: frank jordan, sr., walter parks, louis magee, waldo “coke” jordan, albert spencer, douglas a. doane, edgar prouty back row l to r: charles “dunk” jordan, raymond mckay, stewart hodgman, clinton vanaken, kenneth googins, charles a. spencer, earl r. parks, leroy ellis 78 baseball was a popular sport in veazie along with bas- in the winter months basketball games were a popular ketball. there were great teams over the years past with a activity in the town hall. the earlier teams played in the good winning record, but most of all they enjoyed them- first town hall, which was the old corporation house, res- selves. idence of douglas a. doane on judson street. later the teams played in the grange hall and after it was torn down in the early 1900’s a baseball team was formed known they moved to the present town hall. as the veazie giants. some of the members were: wyatt spencer, walter dwelley, leonard davis, walter johnson, an excellent team of basketball players in 1920-21 was ralph spencer, and willy and ed kent. later, in the 1920’s known as the veazie jrs. in fact, they were known all over another team was formed with sixteen or seventeen men, the area for their agility and their winning record. if there including their three or four pitchers. had been a policy of awarding trophies to the best team i’m sure they would have received one for first place win- bill jordan tells me of his experience traveling to the ners. ball games in the surrounding areas, as far away as millinocket and over to amherst. arthur kennett’s truck william drinkwater sponsored a team called the was their means of transportation. (trucks were just begin- “drinkwater 5”. some of the team members were: ivan ning to sell.) bill said they’d all climb in the back end of lancaster, roland lancaster, john sullivan, charles inman, the truck with all their paraphernalia and make a big day paul gilpatrick and merritt lancaster. of it! each of them would donate fifty cents for the ride. in 1925 the town voted to use the old school house as more baseball teams were formed over the years. they a town hall and the building was then moved to where the all were rugged, ambitious groups whose games were sup- site of the present town hall is today. at the march 1925 ported by the townspeople wherever they played. a good town meeting the town raised and appropriated one hun- time was had by all. dred and fifty dollars to move the bell from the old town hall, (doane residence,) to the new town hall, which at the in 1917 in the town minutes, article #31 read: time was the old school house. later, when the so-called new town hall was torn down, the bell was acquired by “to see if the town will purchase or lease some piece mr. picard and it used to adorn the lawn of his home, now of ground or lot for a baseball ground and raise money the lou silver residence. where it is now i don’t know. i for same.” made several inquiries but the bell could not be traced. the town voted to raise $25.00 with the understanding that there shall be no ball playing in the streets of veazie on sunday ...the money was never spent. 79 veazie juniors (1920-1921) front row l to r: sumner cox irving lancaster, edward hersey back row l to r: robert manning, reginald goode (coach), walter day 80 fred otis driving team in july 4th parade in veazie in the 1940’s. 1953 centennial parade. esther smith standing beside bob smith’s truck. town hall in rear. 81 just about every family in veazie had a vegetable gar- ed in the festivities. one year harrison page (who lived on den and a pig. after the pig was fattened wyatt spencer the orono road), brought his team of oxen and wagon would butcher it for the family’s winter meat. down to veazie and filled it with young people to ride in the parade. for some unknown reason the oxen bolted a popular thing in years gone by was to “help thy during the parade and took off running with the young neighbor.” there were barn raisings, roof repairs, or what- people hanging on tight. no one was hurt in the fracas but ever; no matter how busy the neighbors were they’d this writer is wondering ...could the oxen have been hit by always find time to help each other an hour or two or rocks, stung by bees or pea shooters or what? maybe all day. this was a wonderful way of living side by side. i understand the boys used to aggravate dick crocker and the night crossing tenders by shooting roman candles each year the town had a 4th of july parade. at the little railroad shack and they’d chase them off. everyone took time off from their daily toil and participat- bill jordan on veazie’s first fire truck in july 4th parade in the early 1920’s. 82 aunt hat (1890’s) hattie foyer was a lady of some prominence in town. at the “upper gate”. from there her patrons used to walk it was told to this writer that she ran a house of ill repute down the old county road. a second stop was at hobson catering to anyone who had the money. her first “house” avenue and then down to dewey avenue. the other was on the corner of maple and lemon formerly known as approach was from school street onto the county road. the arthur day home and later as the berce home. her business flourished to the point where she decided she all that remains of aunt hat’s place is a cellar hole at needed a larger place. dewey avenue and grove street. around it several small- er holes have been dug in search of her treasure. legend in the fall of 1898 hattie foyer, (alias fortier, alias, has it that she saved a silver dollar from each of her cus- stevens, alias aunt hat,) built a house in veazie park near tomers in a cask under her sink. the treasure is thought to the river bank situated at the northwest corner of dewey be very large attesting to the popularity of her trade. avenue and grove street. it was a big house with two and perhaps the treasure hunters are looking in the wrong one half stories, room enough for ten beds. more beds place ...her earnings at the new house would have to pay meant more business for aunt hat. the liens. then again, her savings from the old house would have gone to pay for the new. but maybe she was the house was finished in the spring of 1899. the fur- just the kind of person that put things by. lien or no lien, niture was leased and delivered in may. hattie had a new she would save her silver dollars, because that was what stove, two new one hundred and twelve piece dinner sets she did. we can’t really know but i think i’ll go get my and nine toilet sets. spade and go down by the shore road and... aunt hat had paid her workmen and suppliers in cash there were several other “houses” in veazie. one was on delivery. often she would only pay part of the bill and operated by charles johnson and was located on lemon leave the rest for later. this made it possible for her to build street in the home presently owned by arthur bogert. her new house with very little money. on school street still another business was flourishing soon, however, her creditors got after her and liens under the management of billy townsend. this establish- were put on the house by the carpenters, lumber mer- ment was situated on the site where the veazie roller rink chants and hardware stores. the record ends there. we was located. cannot tell if the liens were paid in cash or in services or if the house was repossessed or what. everyone seemed to be content. the log drivers, after weeks and months on the long, difficult, backbreaking log aunt hat was a small widow woman (with one leg big- drives, would find their pleasure with women and drink ger than the other), who wore elegant big hats with and the owners of these “houses” became prosperous. plumes. every year she’d have a “turn out” where she’d parade in her carriage with two exquisite black horses jimmy russell recalls this story about “hat” when he dressed in fancy harness and shiny, polished nickel. this was a young boy living in the old homestead on the main “turn out” i am told was a means of showing her prosper- road. his mother sent him outside to play. (at that time ity along with advertising her business and possibly “twit- there were fields around his home.) once outside he saw ting” some of the people in town. she was a very kind per- a woman digging dandelion greens. she had very long fin- son. if a man had no place to eat or sleep she’d take him gernails. (jim says they were nearly two inches long!) he in until he found employment. yet this same man, when he ran back into the house and yelled to his mother, “mother! had money, she’d “take” him for every cent he had. there’s a witch out there!” his mother looked out and said, “oh no ...that’s only aunt hat.” that was jimmy’s first there were three routes you could take to reach “hat’s” young impression of hattie foyer, with all her aliases, and establishment. one was from a trolley stop at mount hope her extra long fingernails. 83 dwelley cars were becoming prominent in the mid 1900’s with he complimented her on her fine car. model a fords, the “tin lizzys”, and the grand touring cars making their appearance. this was also the “flapper” era then she said, “how much is your bwead?” when the dress lengths were shortened, some women bobbed their hair and the ladies rolled their stockings nine cents a loaf,” he replied. below their knees. a whole “new beginning” came about with these changes including “bathtub gin” and the “i’ll take a loaf,” she said, whereupon he went inside charleston dance. it was told to me that there were a num- and returned with the bread. ber of kitchens in veazie that had stills in them, catering to a patron or two. then she asked again, “how much did you say your bwead was?” he repeated his price of nine cents a loaf. fannie dwelley acquired the first model t. ford in “i’ll take another loaf," she said and so she had him run- town. she was quite proud of her vehicle and rightly so. a ning again. gentleman in town had occasion to tell me this humorous story about fannie and her new car. in the early 1900’s rufus dwelley lived in the present marden house on oak street. he used to run a horse and fannie drove her new ford up to the store, (where wagon express from bangor to veazie and from the veazie libby’s market is now) and honked her horn. the grocer railroad station. rufus was a little eccentric but he loved came out and said, “what can i do for you?" dogs. on the days when he was riding his “jigger” (wagon) he would tie meat to the back of the wagon and to his feet fannie, (who had a slight speech impediment,) replied, to entice any and all dogs to follow him home hoping they “i want you to see my wittle wizzy.” would stay with him. can you imagine the string of dogs there must have been by the time he reached home? skinner speaking of dogs, john skinner tells this story about his tographer by trade, with his studio located in his home on little mongrel dog named “ginger.” as a young boy he state street, he began his business in 1930 and retired in remembers frank beal, a retired lumberman, who lived 1977. where dr. wilbur manter now resides on state street. mr. beal, known to be cranky, was a great man for hand john’s father was born in veazie in 1875. he was one shakes. john taught “ginger” to shake hands on cue. when of the first operators with the bangor railway and electric john would say, “go to beal’s," the dog sat up and offered company. after eighteen years with the “b.r.&e.” he left to her paw to shake hands in imitation of mr. beal. work for otis skinner selling phonographs. about 1920 he went into partnership locating on central street in bangor john skinner, jr., son of john b. and millicent (spencer) under the name of libby skinner company selling phono- skinner was born in veazie in 1907. he attended schools graphs and pianos. in veazie and graduated from bangor high school. a pho- 84 1920’s this young lady shows how she rolled her hose. touring car 1920’s 85 agriculture was one of the earlier sources of income in people lived a hard existence here in the late 1800’s town. many large farms were in evidence. in looking back and during the depression of the 1930’s it was more dev- over the old town minutes for past years the warrant astating. mr. davis tells how he sold three cows for sixty always had an article in it allowing the “cows to roam dollars each, but in actual value they were worth eleven between 4:00 a.m. or 5:00 a.m. until dark,” and as years hundred and fifty dollars per head. people just didn’t have went by the hours for cows to “roam” was changed. the money. a large farm was the davis farm on chase road. peter help that was hired to do the haying in the summer was h. davis, born in veazie in 1853, met and married mary paid five dollars a day. this was hard, backbreaking work, stapleton, born in veazie in 1861. this marriage produced loading loose hay onto a wagon with a pitch fork, hauling five children; maud, hugh, mary, (who died as a young it to the barn, standing on the wagon load, and pitching it child,) thomas, and john. up overhead into the hay loft. in 1950 john sold out his share of the farm to his brother, tom. tom, at present, resides in the old homestead on chase road. a one hundred and fifty foot barn sat across the road one piece of land was the lancaster property which from the house. this barn burned in later years. was located on the old main road. it was twenty five acres long and twelve and one half rods wide and ran directly after the death of their parents, john and tom took over back from main road across the present route 2 into the the dairy farm. they had one hundred head of cows and woods parallel with highview terrace. in 1948 irving delivered milk to homes. by 1920 they delivered milk sole- lancaster built and ran a grocery store on lancaster land ly to the bangor state hospital. where the market presently sits today. he retired as propri- etor in 1973. john, (and no doubt tom and hugh too,) began milking cows at the age of seven. he’d rise at 4:00 a.m. leaving “bunny” as irving is called, was born in veazie in 1905, enough time for chores and then walk to school. he tells the seventh child of eight children of mattie f. (spencer) me that he “milked enough cows to float the queen and henry e. lancaster. other children were, roland, mary!” agnes, forrest, mildred, ralph ivan, merritt, and the youngest member, leonard. john was born in veazie in march 1897. he schooled in veazie, bangor high school and the university of maine. both he and tom were active in college football. tom was also an excellent amateur wrestler. john davis being interviewed by author irving “bunny” lancaster and mike cheney of u.m.o. (taken in the municipal office) 86 (early 1900) residence of alvah and wyatt weed weed garage as it looks today. miss addie weed our eldest living resident addie weed, our eldest woman resident, was born on mother said, “alvah, why is your face so dirty?” he july 6, 1883 in stillwater, maine, one of four children of replied, “mother, i haven’t been sucking any eggs,” which, laura j. (gilman) and james wyatt weed. her father was naturally, gave him away. superintendent of the lumber mills in stillwater. other fam- ily members included a sister flora and two brothers, addie attended the primary school on rock street with alvah and wyatt james. the family moved to veazie when two of her friends, maud davis and ida mcphetres. from she was between two and three years old. her father the little school she progressed to the elementary school bought a house on oak hill then had the building moved up to the sixth grade. shethen was sent to the palm street (by “jigger” wagon,) to state street and set on a prepared school in bangor, living with her great uncle samuel foundation where it sits today. a number of additions were gilman during the week and coming home on the week- added later. ends. her mother, (mr. weed passed away when she was five,) believed it would better prepare her for high school the weeds had one horse, three cows, and chickens. if she attended palm street school for two years, which addie recalls alvah always sucking the eggs in the hen addie felt was not so. house. one day when he came in with a dirty face his 87 in the winter, for recreation, she, her brothers and name over the garage was then changed from “weed “prince,” their mongrel dog would slide on the hill behind garage” to “weed and kelliher.” addie tells me that alvah the hathorn house (frank todd home.) mr. hathorn owned one of america’s first cars called the haynes. he enjoyed watching them and occasionally would play a semi-retired in the 1930’s, farming beans, corn and wheat. prank on them. if their sled was left unattended, mr. alvah passed away in 1956 at the age of seventy six. hathorn would push it down the hill. the weed children upon returning would ask where their sled had gone and addie graduated from bangor high school and beals mr. hathorn would jokingly reply, “timmy cottle took it.” business college. her first job interview was with a lawyer in bangor. she declined the job offer, (salary was three dol- the weeds had a pond on the back of their lot near the lars a week,) saying that the money was barely enough to railroad tracks. alvah and wyatt built a raft to use on the keep her in “neck ribbons!" pond. addie and her brothers would spend hours “going sailing.” in later years the brothers built a boat and used it in later years addie felt there was a need for someone on the river. to keep a check on the appearance of the cemetery so she formed the fairview cemetery association, acting as its flora weed was the first woman to be elected a select- secretary for six years. hoping to keep this board active, woman in veazie. she was also the town auditor for many she approached the town with the suggestion that a ceme- years. in 1959 she passed away. tery board be established. this was done. she was chair- man of the cemetery board for thirty six years. one of the wyatt james was an electrician by trade. he was elec- functions of this board is to check the cemetery every two trocuted while working on a job in california. he was weeks and report anything wrong to the sexton so he can twenty eight. rectify it. alvah ran an automobile sales and service garage next addie went to work at the university of maine in 1908 door to their home on state street. the garage was origi- and retired in 1952. in 1951 she received the (handsome) nally the weed barn which was moved over on its present black bear award from the general alumni association for site in the early 1900’s. two additions were added to it. in her forty four years of dedicated service with the universi- the 1920’s he became a pontiac distributor and took in a ty. she was the first woman to ever receive this award. partner, fred kelliher, who lived on merrick street. the 88 william jordan, our eldest living male resident, was veazie and married grace may turner, daughter of mary born in north brewer, “at the bend,” on april 22, 1886. (page) and charles turner. he and his wife moved to his sister, addie, was five years older than he and his half brewer where their first child william was born. in 1910 brother, fred, was born in 1872. his mother, ellen they again moved to peabody, massachusetts and stayed (johnston) jordan, born in north brewer, met and married five years. in 1915, and four children later, they returned hollis jordan of trenton, maine. to live in brewer. bill was still employed as a painter and paper hanger. by 1918 they moved back to lemon street, bill jordan’s father was a sea captain, making voyages veazie. to the west indies carrying lumber and returning with molasses, rum and rock salt. their marriage was blessed with nine living children in all. they are: william, charles, beulah, waldo, mary, when bill was seventeen years old he moved to veazie frank, grace, elsie, and warner. to work in the morris canoe company. during the sum- mers he traveled via the ferry to and from north brewer, his wife, grace, passed away in april 1955. boarding at the charles turner home at the head of lemon street. in the winter months he roomed there also for the in interviewing him, at the age of ninety one, i found whole sum of two dollars a week. him to have a keen perceptive mind and a wonderful sense of humor. in 1905 he moved to peabody, massachusetts working as a painter and a paper hanger. by 1907 he returned to william n. jordan oldest living male resident helen (hathorn) todd, daughter of alice (tate) and fred centennial in 1953 she compiled, wrote and produced a hathorn was born in veazie on january 6, 1901. she was short play called veazie in review with friends and neigh- a direct descendent of one of the first settlers in veazie. bors as the actors. mrs. frank todd passed away in helen was active in town affairs serving as moderator at november 1974. the town meetings from 1952 to 1971. for veazie’s 89 hathorn residence (state street) 2nd hathorn house built in 1880’s. fred hathorn and dog. mrs. isabelle (beattie) hathorn this picture was taken in 1900. this is the third home built by the hathorns. the barn was built with the second home. l to r: fred hathorn, (helen’s father,) a meatcutter by trade standing near his meat wagon, a neighbor and baby, isabelle beattie hathorn, widow of edwin hathorn, (helen’s grandmother,) and silas hathorn, brother of edwin hathorn, (helen’s uncle.) the home today shows some exterior alterations plus shade trees. the same barn built in the 1880’s is still there. 90 wyatt spencer was born in bangor and was raised by insert a piece of straw in the stem of the bladder and blow his grandfather albert spencer on olive street. spencer the bladder up to the size of a volley ball and tie off the king, son of isabelle (spencer) and her husband joseph end. it hardened up solid giving the children a ball to play king, sr. lives in the old spencer homestead today. with for two or three months. wyatt met and married nellie veazie (no relation to wyatt also had chickens and three cows. he sold milk. general veazie,) and they had six children, wyatt, townspeople would come to the house with their large or isabelle, albert, charles, mary, and ethel. wyatt was small pails and get them filled with raw milk. the cost was known as the town butcher. he had a large barn beside his five cents a pint and ten cents a quart. house with all the necessary equipment including hooks and pulleys. someone would bring his fattened pig to money was scarce in the early 1900’s so a child was wyatt. he very artfully would coax the pig down on its fortunate to have a toy. isabelle tells how her father took a back, scratching its chin to keep the pig still. next, he’d metal rim off a wagon wheel, cut a short stick and gave it take his knife and stick the pig in the throat, painlessly to isabelle to go “rolling hoops” with her friends, all over stopping its breathing. this was done so neatly that not one town and up chase road. (chase road was all fields but squeal was heard from the animal. bleeding the slaugh- for a few houses and cars were non-existent so there was tered pig was essential so as not to taint the meat. no danger.) this entertainment lasted for hours on end. after the pig was bled and gutted, the hind feet were to earn money isabelle would baby sit in the old com- tied together and the animal was put on a big hook, raised pany houses on shore road. her pay was twenty five cents by pulley and lowered into a large vat of boiling water. for all day and sometimes she’d have as many as seven or this would make the skinning process easier. eight children to tend, including babies to diaper. she’d also pick berries up on the “ledges” (behind school) and nothing was wasted on the animal. fat was boiled near the old depot and get fifteen cents a quart selling door down for lard, the head made good hogshead cheese and to door. even the pig tails were fried. many women sewed and embroidered. sheeting was isabelle’s husband, joe king, sr., on occasion helped five cents a yard. most of the children had homemade wyatt to butcher. he said wyatt received the sum of one clothes using grain bags or other materials. a peddler came dollar and fifty cents for two hours work for one pig. often around in a wagon showing the samples of cloth to the he did it free. women. he’d return the following week with the wanted material. after the butchering, the children would draw “lots” to see who would win the pigs bladder. the winner would nellie and wyatt spencer (late 1930’s) 91 prouty is a familiar name in veazie going way back to “by god, you fellas enjoy those pickles.” the 1850’s. in fact, there are five generations of the prouty family who were born here, beginning with mary (davis) yeah, they’re good,” they ’replied. and jonas prouty. norman prouty, sr., nicknamed “dick,” was born in veazie on oak hill in 1893. his parents were “well good,” dick said. “we had a cat that drowned in melissa (page) and warren prouty. “dick’s” wife, minnie one of those barrels and i don’t know which barrel it was (clair) prouty was born in gordonsville, new brunswick in but if you enjoy those pickles eat ’em or take some home 1898. their marriage produced four children, leona, with you ’cause we’re going to thrown them out anyway.” edgar, better known as “buddy,” madeline, and norman, dick never lost any more pickles . . . jr. the prouty homestead was located on oak hill where doris fletcher lives today. a large barn sat where the pres- norman jr. grew up on oak hill helping with farm ent garage is. this housed the horses, cows, chickens, and chores and running errands for his mother. he had a mon- a few pigs. dick was another farmer who also had a milk grel dog named “sandy” that was his companion and route in veazie, delivering with a horse and cart. he had guardian. when norman went to the store up on olive farm land up where the so-called prouty development is street “sandy” would go along running ahead of him today, raising corn, potatoes, beans, cucumbers, and peas, around the corner. if the dog saw a car coming he’d run selling his produce from door to door in neighboring back and grab norman dragging him off the road, holding towns. part of the prouty farm was used for hay which was him there until the car passed by. the dog would do the stored in the barn at the old prouty farm on prouty drive. same thing when norman was sliding on oak hill in the years later dick purchased the campbell farm which winter. he would pull norman off the road. “abby” abutted his farmland. spencer witnessed this a number of times. it’s amazing how some dogs are so intelligent and protective. dick was active in town affairs over the years. he was road commissioner for thirty five years, the longest term of norman prouty, jr., youngest child of dick and minnie office anyone has ever held in veazie. often when he was born in veazie in 1927 and attended bangor and plowed the roads in the winter you’d see him plowing out brewer high school. he met and married frances hodgins the residents’ yards as a courtesy. waldo and charles in 1948. their six children are: norman, tommy, randy, jordan, and albert spencer were some of dick’s workers. timmy, dicky, and joanna. the men who worked for him would gather in dick’s norman remembers the great fun sliding on oak hill. warm cellar in the mornings before starting out on the he said there would be as many as seventy-five people out road. they’d discuss the jobs, tell a few jokes, or mention there at one time. they’d start at the top of oak hill, slide some of their experiences. dick had two big pork barrels down around the corner and up olive. from olive they’d in the cool part of the cellar filled with pickles, one barrel reverse their direction down olive and back up to oak of sour and one of dill. he noticed the pickles were disap- hill. “bunny” lancaster mentions the bob sleds on the hills pearing and found the men eating them. one day he said, holding up to fifteen people. they’d be out sliding until late at night. this was a great, clean, wholesome sport. 92 norman prouty. jr. with doe “sandy” and horse “pet". taken about 1938 norman “dick” prouty, sr. and wife minnie. oct. 1963 93 in the late 1800’s “dingbat” prouty lived in a humble later “dingbat” was found downstream sitting under a abode down behind where the jackson boat company is tree smoking, unconcerned about the whole incident. he located. he was a log driver who spent his spare time loi- was never punished by the law but he never lived it down tering around aunt hat’s place. known to be a man to up to the day he died in about 1915. 1 was told that he aggravate certain individuals, one day he kept twitting an died working with dynamite on the austin )ones property. indian who was in the bow of the ferry. the indian didn’t want to make the river trip so with prouty’s persistent “twit- bill jordan tells me that “dingbat” was the only man ting” he jumped out of the bateau and left. “dingbat” he’d ever seen who could lay flat on his back on a floating jumped into the boat, overturning it and drowning several log, jump up directly on his feet and never get wet. a well people including two indians. coordinated feat i’d say. austin jones owned what is still referred to as the any given day you would be apt to see a friend or two graystone farms. his livestock consisted of horses, cows, patronizing his ice cream shop. pigs, sheep and some chickens. in the 1930’s to the 1950’s he had a home delivery milk route. on may 21, 1935 he some of the farm land has since been converted to a registered his patented milk bottle with the town of veazie. trailer park run by austin’s son, freeland )ones. he, his on one side of the milk bottle, (printed in royal blue,) was wife sally, and their family now reside in the stone house etched gray stone farm dairy and his telephone number. on the trailer park road. the other side of the bottle simply read, gray stone farm. austin jones passed away in august 1972 at the age of in the 1940’s and 1950’s he also ran an ice cream par- eighty-four. his wife, marjorie (brooks) )ones, predeceased lor selling home made ice cream, fudge and chocolate him in september 1958 at the age of fifty-eight. milk. the milk was ten cents for all you could drink! on gray stone cabins (1940’s) building in center was used as the ice cream parlor. 94 post war era 1945 - 1977 veazie was not prepared for the changes it was to suf- ignored by the new people, erasing their old arguments fer after the war. the town had very few ordinances at the and starting new ones. time, none dealing with land use. several committees had been formed at various times to try to implement zoning or on july 1, 1974, state legislature passed a funding law other controls but the town meeting had rejected all their called l d 1994 which turned out to be a controversial efforts. issue and caused a split with towns in the state. the prop- erty taxes doubled and even tripled in the so-called “rich, veterans mortgage loans and the re-opening of dow air pay-in” towns. the “receiving” towns were happy to force base in the late 1950’s created much demand for acquire this “wealth." the veazie school committee felt new suburban housing in the bangor area. veazie, with that this was the time for veazie to correct the inadequa- large tracts of open land, was an inviting place to develop cies of the old town hall-school use for physical educa- for both tract housing and mobile home parks. the auto- tion and the demand from the state for the hot lunch pro- mobile replaced the street car as the commuters’ means of gram. the town formed a multi-purpose building transportation. committee. plans were drawn up with an architectural firm and the town held a special town meeting to purchase subdivisions had been attempted in veazie before. nearby lands and buildings. a petition was circulated to veazie park in 1899 was only barely successful. it was sal- rescind the action taken at the special town meeting but vaged by one buyer, hattie foyer, who acquired many of the petition was returned to the selectmen too late to be the lots. towle heights was designed in 1941 and slowly validated. taxpayers, to this day, still call this purchase a sold off during the ’40’s and ’50’s. the development of the “boondoggle.” late ’50’s and ’60’s was much bigger and more successful than either of these. the state ran into financial problems. receiving towns were clamoring to get their share of the 100% funding a liberal zoning ordinance was approved in 1957 and from the state to build their educational “dreams.” this amended many times. specific subdivision regulations didn’t last long as within a few years the state called a were not passed until 1962. this lack of clear laws led to moratorium on new building. to this day veazie still does a haphazard development. the town’s only real control not have its multi-building. was in accepting or rejecting roads. services were slowly extended to the new areas, often with the developer pay- by 1976 the planning board became more active. they ing most of the costs. worked months on zoning ordinance revisions which the town passed in 1977. developer and subdivision clauses the town’s population tripled in the thirty years were carefully scrutinized to protect the town and the tax- between 1940 and 1970. the number of school children payer. increased dramatically with the new young families. taxes necessarily rose. there is still room for veazie to grow which of course, could happen, but not without jeopardizing the school and friction between the old residents and the new devel- town facilities and services. at present the town has a pop- oped. the old political powers were weakened and ulation of approximately 1800 people. 95 town meetings dates, page (vol. - page), issues of importance. meetings called solely to elect county and state officials omitted. june 28, 1853 1870 march 21, (1-249), work out road taxes, school accepted charter terms july 5 - elected officers 1871 march 20, (1-260), several adjournments, 1854 march 13, school houses, truancy law school terms county and state taxes, may 11, (1-28), new schoolhouse bondsman of wm. dorr july 6, (1-33), loan 1872 march 25, (1-271), tax abatement, poor, draft 1855 march 19, (1-38), reconciling with bangor code of laws (1-45), liquor license 1873 march 24, (1-289), j.w. veazie taxes, parkhurst 1856 march 10, (1-51), truancy law, d.l. clark store, land, small pox, liquor agent sabbath 1874 march 23, (1-307), sell school on moores 1857 march 23, (1-61), (chase) road, not buy fire engine, town hall 1858 march 15, (1-80), rental. 1859 march 14, (1-95), fire engine 1875 march 22, (1-323), june 13, (i-101), aroostook r.r. 1876 january 13, (1-339), dam at treats falls bangor 1860 march 19, (1-111), granite wall for cemetery, march 20, (1-344), roads roads. 1877 march 26, loans 1861 march 18, (1-127), roads, re-burying august 20, (1-374), selling state bonds, abated september 9, (1-135), aid for soldiers families. taxes 1862 march 17, (1-141), aid for soldiers families 1878 march 25, (1-381), selling state bonds conditional april 4, selling state bonds, not assessing taxes july 29, bounty to volunteers, aid to families 1879 march 24, (1-393), tore down pound august 26, bounty to draftees 1880 march 22, (1-408), 1863 march 20, (1-156), pound, proportional school 1881 march 21, budget, aid 1882 february 6, summary school closing november 27, borrowing for volunteers, march 20, (1-438), school terms, town house penobscot r.r. repairs 1864 march 14, (1-166), aid, disposing of small 1883 march 26, (1-458), purchased road machine schoolhouses, large schoolhouse damage and november 12, renting engine house to insurance knights of honor september, allow soldiers to vote 1884 march 24, renting engine house january 21, bounties september, (1-475), approved state 1865 february 9, bounties prohibition march 20, (1-182), sell shore rd. school. 1885 march 23, (1-482), roads, bought safe, draft june 19, replaced town clerk new bylaws september 11, trouble with samuel veazie 1886 march 22, (1-496) taxes 1887 march 22, (1-510) november 10, petition to veazie on new dam april 23, expenses in trial of john mcphetres 1866 march 12, (1-198), assumed private payments 1888 march 19, (1-522), roads for substitutes, a.d. chase bondsman, sell june 4, selling bonds to pay for j. mcphetres shore rd. school case may 21, re-vote on payments for substitutes 1889 march 25, (1-545), roads, enlarge cemetery october 4, moved shore rd. school january 9, not annexing part of orono, 1867 march 25, new engine room - town hall opposed to mt. hope annex june 3, tipling shops, new road august 23, (2-1), grant bangor street rwy. 1868 march 23, (1-224), road, not buy fire engine, track on county rd. charnel house general veazie death december 26, penobscot water co. accepted may, accepted new town hall from j.w. 1890 march 24, (2-13), fire apparatus and building, veazie, not to buy fire engine. loans 1869 march 22, (1-240), roads, annexation to april 5, town hall, loan bangor, school repair. 96 1891 january 13, (2-27), voted not to rescind street 1912 march 25, (2-546), didn’t buy new road rwy. machine, sold r. farris house kept lot march 30, (2-31), street railway, organized fire april 20, sold primary school company 1913 march 24, (2-593), bell, sidewalks, water october 17, voted not to abate taxes on wood and contract logs april 21, bell, well, hydrants december 24, abating taxes on utilities and firearms june 13, not to sell mcphetres farm companies, adjourned several times 1914 march 23, (2-627), well, town hall repairs, not sell 1892 march 28, (2-50), utilities abatement, renting mcphetres, hydrants, drain chase rd. june 19, not town hall buying grange hall, student tuition over 4 years 1893 march 20, (2-82), hydrants on chase rd., fire 1915 march 22, (2-667), insurance, bell tower, no equipment sewer study may 8, tax abatement on veazie lumber co. may 7, sold lot next to cemetery 1894 march 26, water out chase rd. 1916 march 20, (2-703), april 30, (2-109), tax exemption on logs 1917 march 26, (2-732), no new school, baseball field, no 1895 march 28, (2-124), high school, shore rd., snow plow school repairs november 13, electric car fares (no action in record) 1896 march 23, (2-142), 1918 march 18, (2-749) bought flag 1897 march 22, (2-167), railroad 1919 march 10, (2-770), school fence 1898 march 28, (2-192), high school v. tuition, 1920 january 7, exempted morris canoe co. if abatement on public works co., overhead they rebuild crossing r.r. march 15, (3-6), ball field, sidewalks, sell farris lot august 27, overhead crossing 1921 march 14, (3-31), health union, town scales 1899 march 27, (2-220), shore rd. hose house on 1922 march 13, (3-47), sell town hall, sewer study oak hill, notes committee august 27, s.s. gilpatrick lands march 31, reconsider sale of town hallpostponed 1900 march 26, dispensed with free high school, 1923 march 12, town hall repairs, sidewalk voted june 4, public works co. (3-86), sewer 1901 march 25, (2-263) september 26, town hall sale postponed, school 1902 march 24, (2-278), olive st. sidewalk, debt curriculum 1903 march 30, (2-301), town hall floor, maine 1924 march 10, (3-104), health officer, sewer voted, central r.r. suit school study april 20, bond issue, hydrant march 29, school building committee report april 1904 march 28, (2-322), 15, school moving and building 1905 march 27, (2-347), parris house repairs, baptist july 14, (3-127), school financing church acquisition 1925 march 9, (3-141), grading school lot, no lemon st. 1906 march 26, (2-359), purchase robert mcphetres place sewer april 4 bought r. mcphetres, bond issue march 26, rescinded 1923 sidewalks, loan june 30, authorized sale of mcphetres, cemetery 1926 march 8, (3-173), sewers, school insurance, 1907 march 25, (2-389), hose house, accountant, bangor cemetery, bell rwy. and electric co. and veazie lumber co. 1927 march 14, (3-210), cemetery, town hall janitor assessments 1928 march 12, (3-239), state st. - lemon st. sewer no 1908 march 30, (2-412), sell gravel from mcphetres, teachers required to live in town, no town hall accountant, protests r.r. land taking addition july 28, (2-424), joined with brewer, hampden supt. june 26, teacher fired, schools, police of schools 1929 march 18, (3-256), sidewalk, rock st. brook, school 1909 march 29, (2-441), hydrants, street lights, sidewalk quality, piano, named school, oak st. sewer april 14, not leasing town farm, street light 1930 march 17, (3-276), dump on town farm, study 1910 march 21, (2-474), street lights fire truck 1911 march 27, (2-508) taxes april 28, bought fire apparatus november 18, new april 10, board resigns and re-elected, re-does town clerk march 27 meeting 1931 march 16, (3-329), school physician, school st. october 9, water contract sewer, no curfew law, cemetery by-laws 97 1932 march 21, (3-354), cemetery, no teachers 1944 march 20, (5-146), cemetery, gov’t bonds, residence rule drainage may 10, rescinded taking down cemetery 1945 march 12, (5-183), town hall fence october 3, road work, town hall repairs 1933 march 13, (3-389), no sewer on state and 1946 march 18, (5-212), memorial project, burgess green st., burgess farm farm, cemetery april 3, not buying burgess farm, school may 9, a.l. day factory tax abatement committee may 20, no zoning december 9, (4-11), voted state and flagg st. 1947 march 24, school st. sewer, dump, town hall 1934 march 12, (4-21), no labor payment of taxes, rules, new development road, sold merrick st. hose house ladies aid dishes, no zoning, cemetery april 8, sewers, school bonds october 29, committee to study zoning and june 23, hydrant, no rock st. sewer building permits, sidewalk october 21, chase rd. street lights 1935 march 18, (4-46), swetts pond, stream behind 1948 march 22, 5-297, rock st. sewer o’briens cemetery, oppose state tax on bangor hydro march 31, school grounds, dump, town hall may 1, sell hose house on merrick st., accept rent, telephone budget and planning committee june 11, loan, joined mma, burgess gravel pit august 19, discontinued old dump, started november 9, new school study, telephone dis- new dump tricting, burgess land october 14, tax bills 1949 march 21, towle hgts. rd. sidewalk, speed october 28, release deeds law, fire equipment, widen riverview st., 1936 march 23, (4-87), (met at penobscot lodge), hydro right of way, school addition committee cemetery, sewer march 31, trash collection, sewer salaries june 29, kept watering trough and town scales september 2, (5-343), tuition for 8th graders 1937 march 15, resurfacing tarred roads, removed november 15, police, build schoolhouse town scales, new town hall addition, buying drinkwater field, bond issue, april 15, no new town hall sewers 1938 march 1, (4-136), no new town hall 1950 march 27, (5-355), march 14, committee on fire protection, build march 28, (5-367), tarring roads, state and town hall chase rd. sewers march 31, rescind town hall, buy grange hall, april 24, school addition, selectmens election fire truck november 13, school, hydrant june 23, grange hall repairs december 4, school equipment july 6, (4-169), build town hall with wpa 1951 march 26, school grounds title, sewer, tarring august 3, bond issue on new town hall roads, sears lot august 15, rescinded aug. 3 bond issue may 7, (5-414), health council, school grounds, august 25, revoted bond issue, grange hall and sears lot old town hall. september 4, workmans compensation, sears 1939 march 27, (4-190), staggered selectmen, drink- lot water recreation field, studying fire equipment october 5, accepted sewer district march 19, (5-12), loan, siren, town hall 1952 march 24, (5-441), selectmens election, drain equipment shore rd., sears lot, budget committee, september 14, loan, bond issue recreation committee 1940 march 25, (5-25), speed signals, selectmens may 12, budget committee, school grounds telephone july 28, sell mcphetres farm, road 1941 march 31, (5-73), towle hgts. 1953 march 23, (6-6), planning board, budget june 30, towle hgts. taxes committee, centennial, fire equip., october 15, l. sullivan to lahey clinic telephone, lemon st. extension december 23, road machine accident august 3, school fence, map of town 1942 march 23, (5-96), insurance, tarring chase rd., september 21, buy prouty land adjoining civil defense recreation field september 17, no towle hgts. rd., road work 1954 march 29, (6-44), old shore road, civil defense 1943 march 22, (5-128), towle hgts. rd., burgess tower, no zoning, rebuilding olive st. place 98 1955 march 28, (6-78), study manager form of govt., 1966 march 21, (7-104), town hall repair, new school gypsy moths bus, fire equipment, committee on selectmens june 2, retarring roads august 11, zoning election, sewer district september 6, zoning june 6, no old shore rd., no govt. reform october 24, water district november 1, zoning changes, sell town lot on november 28, report on town manager govt., stillwater ave. sunday school constable 1967 march 13, (7-126), new floor in town hall, kennett 1956 february 16, (6-128), school addition committee land, cemetery, old river road june 20, thompson march 26, (6-134), voted school addition, bonds, rd., dogs, calling outside fire departments water district, trailers, water, taxes, cemetery 1968 march 18, (7-142), zoning, kenney land, veazie june 11, cemetery, reconstruction of school st. park title, dropped mma, municipal ski slope, 1957 january 28, (6-178), parking ordinance march 25, grove st. (6-182), accepted zoning, sewer district, september 4, reconstruct grove st., roads revaluation committee, road building committee october 14, replacing selectman, zoning, school july 29, no revaluation, swimming pool fire alarm 1958 march 24, (6-230), safe, zoning, planning, school 1969 march 10, (7-170), no new municipal garage, ski bus slope, committees on town manager, school, fire 1959 march 23, (6-276), right of way through drinkwater house addition to parking lot, zoning property, zoning, mobile home ordinance, curfew, june 16, water survey, mutual aid, roads october school grounds 13, accepted orono-veazie water district june 21, no right of way through drinkwater field, 1970 march 16, (8-5), new school, ski slope, town hall flagg st. health and sanitation ordinance rules, no govt. reform 1960 march 21, (6-334), state st., fire dept. committee, april 6, no new school buy fire truck, new town hall, cu rfew 1971 march 22, (8-24), new school building committee, may 17, school budget, new fire truck tax dates, zoning, subdivision, gravel amendments september 13, blotners private sewer, fire truck april 27, accepted new school addition, honey bond, rebuild oak and grove st., fallen trees land 1961 february 6, (6-391), school building committee june 7, sewer district, conservation commission march 27, fire truck, accepted flouride october 11, reaccepted water district november may 29, water on thompson rd., blotner 22, bond issue for school development and trailer park 1972 march 20, (8-48), snowmobile excise, social 1962 january 2, (6-427), school addition security to town august 28, roads june 12, roads march 19, (7-3), school addition, revaluation, new 1973 march 19, studying town manager system, dogs municipal bldg. april 9, unpaged, school budget, cemetery, police december 11, subdivision regulation, zoning, 1973 july 23, ellingsen apartments roads 1974 march 18, committees on new municipal building, 1963 march 11, (7-36), no new municipal building and charter july 29, street lights, no new town hall, fire may 6, budgeting, constables car, accepted shore regulation problems line zoning 1964 march 16, (7-60), no govt. reform, kennett september 24, city bus subsidy, municipal building land development december 9, purchase kennett and drinkwater june 29, dump, fire alarm- telephone property, approved new municipal building august 31, reconstructing olive st., roads 1965 march 15, (7-82), roads, siren may 5, dump, land trades, siren 99 1975 january 27, rescinded kennett purchase and 1976 march 22, vol. 8, unpaged, town parking lot, municipal building kennett house march 17, road building program, zoning, no low may 11, school budget, rent kennett house income housing, opposed kennett purchase and september 13, bus subsidy, legal fees, trees, new municipal building. approved charter. municipal building april 14, bus subsidy, police and fire equipment, wynnes suit 1977 march 19, sand for private use, solid waste, may 28, school budget police cruiser november 18, approved kennett purchase, fire june 13, school budget, low income or elderly department housing december 16, kennett loan, approved new municipal building, fire calls, bicentennial, legal fees town manager curtis lunt, dorothy henderson, fletcher municipal building began construction in 1975. administrative assistant, cindy pelletier, secretary. the town office began conducting business there in january 1977. 100 veazie town officers (selectmen listed first - *indicates town clerk) 1853 - hiram ford, james monroe, george smith 1874 - wyatt weed, george smith, charles a. *a. j. stockwell rollins 1854 - nahum warren, r.r. park, paul ham *edwin k. stuart *a.j. stockwell 1875 - wyatt weed, george smith, c.m. freeman 1855 - nahum warren, r.r. park, a.c. palmer *edwin k. stuart *d. livermore clark 1876 - wyatt weed, john b. skinner, p.h. davis 1856 - nahum warren, s.l. fish, a.c. palmer *b.c. seavey *d. livermore clark 1877 - wyatt weed, john b. skinner, peter h. davis 1857 - nahum warren, joseph c. rollins, albion *b. c. seavey morris 1878 - wyatt weed, george a. sproul, peter h. *a.j. stockwell davis 1858 - s.l. morris, wm. lowder, e. sproul *byron c. seavey *a.j. stockwell 1879 - george a. sproul, c.e. rich, a.j. mcphetres 1859 - s.l. morris, levi blodgett, david s. howard *fred l. pratt *d.l. clark 1880 - wyatt weed, a.j. spencer, wilder page 1860 - nahum warren, isaac h. spencer, joseph *g. b. marden robinson 1881 - albert j. spencer, john b. skinner, andrew j. *d.l. clark mcphetres 1861 - nahum warren, isaac spencer, albert *fred l. pratt spencer 1882 - albert j. spencer, john b. skinner, cyrus m. *d.l. clark freeman 1862 - nahum warren, george smith, g.b. marden *fred l. pratt *a.d. chase 1883 - albert j. spencer, john b. skinner, fred pratt 1863 - nahum warren, asa b. waters, mark *fred pratt thompson 1884 - a. j. spencer, albert h. gilman, fred pratt *john s. morse *fred pratt 1864 - nahum warren, james e. morrill, gustavus b. 1885 - a. j. spencer, albion morris, wm. thompson marden *john e. kent *a. d. chase 1886 - edwin k. stuart, geo. a. sproul, albert 1865 - james e. morrill, mark thompson, japheth w. gilman dexter, jr. *john e. kent *albert d. chase 1887 - e. k. stuart, a. h. gilman, wm. thompson 1866 - mark thompson, g.b. marden, n.b. rollins *horace h. sproul *john p. thompson 1888 - a. j. spencer, andrew j. mcphetres, john b. 1867 - nahum warren, g.b. marden, d.w. dickey skinner *j. p. thompson *fred l. pratt 1868 - wyatt weed, s.l. morris, d.w. dickey 1889 - a.j. mcphetres, mark thompson, charles *j. p. thompson turner 1869 - wyatt weed, samuel l. morris, ephraim 1890 - a.j. mcphetres, edwin k. stuart, nicholas h. moor callanan *john kent *john e. kent *levi f. hewey 1891 - a.j. spencer, albion morris, john kent 1870 - wyatt weed, samuel l. morris, john *john e. kent thompson 1892 - a.j. spencer, j. towle, william thompson *a. j. stockwell *n.f. callanan 1871 - wyatt weed, john p. thompson, samuel s. 1893 - a. j. spencer, albion morris, john e. kent morris *n. f. callanan *john p. thompson 1894 - wm. thompson, peter h. davis, fred 1872 - wyatt weed, gustavus marden, john p. hathorne thompson *fred pratt *john p. thompson 1873 - nahum warren, gustavus marden, charles a. rollins *john p. thompson 101 1895 - wm. thompson, fred h. hathorn, fred sproul 1917 - leonard lambert, edward m. bulles, herbert *n.j. callanan webster 1896 - j.h. hathorn, john e. kent, geo. w. frost *frank c. turner *n. f. callanan 1918 - peter h. davis, james g. dudley, charles e. 1897 - fred hathorne, j. e. kent, geo. w. frost turner *n. h. callanan *frank c. turner 1898 - f.h. hathorne, stephen d. millit, geo. w. frost 1919 - peter h. davis, james g. dudley, charles e. *leon f. kent turner 1899 - fred l. pratt, fred h. hathorne, otis a. *frank c. turner skinner 1920 - p. h. davis, james g. dudley, wm. drinkwater *leon f. kent *frank c. turner 1900 - f. l. pratt, p. h. davis, fred sproul 1921 - peter h. davis, james g. dudley, william j. *leon f. kent drinkwater 1901 - fred l. pratt, peter h. davis, fred sproul *frank c. turner *leon f. kent 1922 - peter h. davis, austin w. jones, charles e. turner 1902 - peter davis, fred sproul, roderick p. hathorn *frank c. turner *ralph a. spencer 1923 - james g. dudley, william j. drinkwater, 1903 - fred pratt, roderick p. hathorn, george e. charles e. turner spencer *frank c. turner *wm. s. kent 1924 - james g. dudley, edward m. bulles, harry e. 1904 - wm. thompson, roderick p. hathorn, geo. honey s. spencer *frank c. turner *wm. s. kent 1925 - frank c. turner, harry e. honey, mortimer 1905 - wm. thompson, geo. spencer, m. sullivan, jr. d. wentworth *wm. s. kent *frank c. turner 1906 - fred l. pratt, geo. s. spencer, michael 1926 - f. c. turner, mortimer d. wentworth, sullivan, jr. leonard lambert *wm. s. kent *frank c. turner 1907 - r. p. hathorn, h. c. milliken, frank turner 1927 - frank c. turner, m. d. wentworth, frank w. *herbert l. pratt rutter 1908 - wm. thompson, roderick p. . hathorn, m. *frank c. turner cushman 1928 - f. c. turner, m. d. wentworth, f. w. rutter *herbert l. pratt *frank c. turner 1909 - george s. spencer, michael sullivan, jr., 1929 - f. c. turner, m. d. wentworth, merritt lancaster herbert l. pratt *frank c. turner *frank c. turner 1930 - james g. dudley, merritt lancaster, charles 1910 - roderick p. hathorn, m. sullivan, jr., e. turner herbert l. pratt *f. c. turner *frank c. turner 1931 - james g. dudley, f. c. turner, donald p. holmes 1911 - r. p. hathorn, elmo j. turner, edward o’brien *f. c. turner *frank c. turner 1932 - james g. dudley, f. c. turner, frank plourde 1912 - peter h. davis, elmo turner, bertram king *f. c. turner *frank c. turner 1933 - james g. dudley, f. c. turner, frank plourde 1913 - alvah h. towle, bert king, leonard e. lambert *f. c. turner *frank c. turner 1934 - a. a. harkness, b. l. king, frank plourde 1914 - fred l. pratt, bert l.-king, leonard lambert *f. c. turner *frank c. turner 1935 - james g. dudley, f. c. turner, flora e. weed 1915 - a. h. towle, leonard lambert, herbert s. webster *lillian m. turner *frank c. turner 1936 - bertram l. king, walter g. shorey, james m. 1916 - r. p. hathorn, bert l. king, laurence sullivan gamble *frank c. turner *lillian m. turner 102 1937 - james g. dudley, walter shorey, james 1956 - richard bronson, edgar c. prouty, jack libby gamble *earl flanders *lillian m. turner 1957 - edgar prouty, jackson a. libby, clarence j. russell 1938 - james g. dudley, walter g. shorey, kenneth *earl flanders a. googins 1958 - edgar prouty, jackson a. libby, clarence j. russell *lillian m. turner *earl flanders 1939 - james g. dudley, kenneth a. googins, 1959 - edgar prouty, clarence j. russell, allan f. mchale irving lancaster *earl flanders *lillian m. turner 1960 - f. s. howatt, clarence j. russell, allan f. mchale 1940 - james g. dudley, irving r. lancaster, stanley *earl flanders howatt 1961 - edgar prouty, james m. wentworth, edward *lillian m. turner l. thomas 1941 - james g. dudley, irving lancaster, f. stanley *earl flanders howatt 1962 - edgar prouty, james m. wentworth, edward *lillian m. turner l. thomas 1942 - james g. dudley, irving lancaster, f. stanley *earl m. flanders howatt 1963 - f. s. howatt, clarence j. russell, charles b. king *lillian turner *marjorie jordan 1943 - james dudley, f. stanley howatt, james m. 1964 - f. stanley howatt, clarence j. russell, gamble charles b. king *lillian m. turner *marjorie jordan 1944 - james g. dudley, f. stanley howatt, james 1965 - austin jones, clarence j. russell, calvin d. otis m. gamble *marjorie jordan *lillian m. turner 1966 - robert j. shorey, clarence j. russell, calvin 1945 - f. stanley howatt, james m. gamble, waldo d. otis e. robinson *marjorie jordan *lillian m. turner 1967 - robert j. shorey, calvin d. otis, dana s. 1946 - f. stanley howatt, james m. gamble, waldo treadwell e. robinson *marjorie jordan *lillian m. turner 1968 - robert j. shorey, clarence j. russell, dana 1947 - f. stanley howatt, james m. gamble, charles treadwell h. jordan *marjorie jordan *lillian m. turner 1969 - robert j. shorey, calvin d. otis, dana s. 1948 - irving lancaster, james m. gamble, charles treadwell h. jordan *joanne m. clapp *dorothy honey 1970 - calvin d. otis, dana s. treadwell, russell 1949 - stanley howatt, james m. gamble, charles hathaway jordan *esther smith *dorothy honey 1971 - calvin d. otis, dana s. treadwell, russell d. 1950 - stanley howatt, james gamble, charles hathaway jordan *esther s. smith *john m. gilbert 1972 - calvin otis, russell hathaway, tyler dunning 1951 - james m. gamble, albert attner, everett *esther smith treworgy 1973 - tyler dunning, russell hathaway, george *frances prouty monroe 1952 - stanley howatt, james m. gamble, james e. *esther smith tseaulieu 1974 - dorothy henderson, russell hathaway, *earl m. flanders george monroe 1953 - stanley howatt, richard bronson, james e. *esther smith beaulieu 1975 - dorothy henderson, george monroe, kenneth *earl m. flanders hayes, esther smith 1954 - stanley howatt, richard bronson, james e. 1976 - dorothy henderson, frank st. louis, beaulieu robert ellingsen, carrol ellis, kenneth hayes *earl flanders 1955 - richard bronson, everett treworgy, edgar c. prouty *earl flanders 103 (town manager form of government) 1977 - george monroe, mary e. silver, robert ellingsen, carroll ellis, kenneth p. hayes about 1920 looking down on old shore road with penobscot river asa b. smith farm (state st.) in background. on right, behind trees, is part of the this farm was located where the richard bronson home bangor hydro-electric company’s veazie plant. is today. building where john kent ran a business at turn of centu- looking up olive street. town hall on left. route 2 in ry. later years george white had a barber shop and pool background on hill. hall there. 104 list of militia in the town of veazie, april 1, 1861 (in safe, miscellaneous papers, 1853 - 1900) bates, warren, jr. gilpatrick, samuel t. moor, george spencer, almand r. buckley, daniel green, joseph moor, adaniram, jr. spencer, gorham buckley, michaud green, lewellen morse, robert q. spencer, abner bonney, newton e. gilday, patrick morse, john g. spencer, daniel grover, joseph h. mcpheters, robert spencer, albert j. chase, albert d. giles, otis mcpheters, francis m. spencer, ruben cottle, samuel i. giles, david mcpheters, nathaniel spencer, isaac h. cary, joseph t. gilman, samuel b. marden, john a. shepley, joseph h. chapman, sewell, jr. marden, nathan l. shaw, john n. clark, danforth l. hathorn, james m. marden, gustavus b. spurr, william callannan, thomas hathorn, samuel ). moulton, othenial spencer, edwin g. canty, john hathorn, andrew j. morrill, james e. stockwell, andrew j. hathorn, edwin mann, daniel sprout, james b. davis, newman a. hathorn, silas minck, james sprout, robert f. davis, john hathorn, roderick mitchell, henry sprout, george davis, hugh hathorn, levi miller, joseph sullivan, michael, jr. davis, george p. hathorn, charles mutty, joseph davis, wales, p. hathorn, silas morse, lewis f. thompson, mark davis, henry j. hewey, otis thompson, william doane, william hewey, otis r. nasen, josiah j. turner, putnam doe, andrew j. hewey, nelson tozier, alphonzo durgan, john m. hewey levi obrien, dennis towle, john f. duggans, john howard, david l. trundy, benson l. dwelley, william hutch, thomas e. page, wilder page, alfred dwelley, john hickey, michael palmer, asa c. park, warren, eugene h. dwelley, james l. hickey, john roderick park, lewis h. waters, asa b. dudley, gilman h. hurd, sullivan wentworth, john h. day, warren harmen, samuel j. e. phillips, amos m. phillips, wentworth, samuel v. dickey, daniel w. hutchins, isaac b. george w. phillips, george weston, ferdinand door, william h. h. prouty, jonas prouty, wealch, gilman d. dexter, japheth w., jr. inman, charles george c. webb, james b. dermont, cornelius weed, james dresser, william p. judkins, ammi rollins, freeman, n. johnston, tobias h. rollins, charles h. w. york, joel m. elwell, james h. rollins, joseph c. emery, samuel, jr. kent, thomas rollins, george w. (signed) nahum warren emery, shepherd kent, william rollins, john l. assessors of veazie emery, hewey kent, john robinson, joseph t. emery, ansel total 151 linnell, benjamin f. smith, joseph d. smith, farrington, george w. lynch, timothy samuel smith, ebenezer w. farris, james lane, orren smith, george folie, morris smith, henry n. freeman, cynus m. morris, frank spencer, george h. 105 captain fish’s (veazie) company (pay began feb. 20 and march 11, 1839; generally ended april 1 and 24, 1839) commissioned officers captain samuel l. fish lieutenant francis j. cummings ensign gilbert emerson non-commissioned officers sergeant david c. jellison sergeant john p. davis sergeant moses s. page sergeant joseph budson sergeant james s. eldrige sergeant jesse hutchings corporal josiah mcpheters corporal charles h. forbes corporal joseph bray corporal george lincoln corporal john b. bond corporal kenney snow musician robert p. chase musician solomon p. rowe privates thomas abbott, almarin ames, john boyd, timothy burton, william batchelder, isaac russell, william ballard, jr., george burns, david l. billings, justus l. carr, thomas cunningham, william j. chapman, garey chapman, ephraim dorr, william dwelley, jr., samuel deering, james dickinson, john dunham, jr., joseph duran, elisha m. eveleth, amasan s. emerton, chester ferrin, danial fowler, james h. gilmore, wm. p. guppy, shadrach gray, john grindel, abial harmon, seth holt, abel s. jordan, joseph james, levi k. kilburn, rowland lawrence, william lassell, david lancaster, john n. lawrence, thomas mann, henry montgomery, john e. miller, charles newcomb, alvah osgood, roderick r. park, charles patten, samuel peirce, joseph priest, thomas raymond, joseph c. stinson, jacob p. sweat, william c. snow, samuel spencer, samuel sheets, john southard, jr., horatio n. stinson, james stubbs, george simpson, samuel s. trivit, timothy c. tapley, levi tower, benson d. wood, william b. moody, gilbert knownton, albion m. fish (servant), joseph w. curtis (servant), ebin b. weston (servant). 106 the following is a list of veazie men who served their country at the time of the following conflicts. it is as nearly accurate as i could possibly get. my apologies if anyone is missed. some of the men on these lists served months and some served years . . . world war i veterans lester barbour roland lancaster rex bridges elmer leblanc silas burton william mcfarland herman church dennis o’brien ralph church clifford prouty leonard davis henry read tom davis lawrence robbins allie dwelly ralph shorey walter dwelly walter shorey clayton foyer oscar spencer clarence greenlief frank stanchfield george greenlief george sullivan alton grindle o’dillion turner charles inman harold wentworth forest lancaster nelson white world war ii veterans evelyn ames james russell norman bateman richard jones **(gold star) gerald bell freeland jones hartley bell frank jordan, sr. frank bostrom william jordan vernon braley joseph king, sr. john braley raymond kennett wilbur braley roland lancaster, jr. ernest burgess russell leblanc frank butterfield lewis magee annie mae bussell (canadian wac) george mckay clyde bussell raymond mckay thurston bussell paul mcphee george calkins william mcphee john clark **(gold star) james milliner **(gold star) kenneth esterbrook ralph milliner allan ellis cyril morrison john ellis stephen morrison leroy ellis osgood nickerson george fairley fred otis (**gold star) harold field - norman otis eugene gamble walter parks donald holmes albert pinkham george honey gerald plourde harry honey donald poole 107 walter poole albert swan joseph poulin everett treworgey edgar prouty merrill trojano norman prouty, jr. william trojano paul roberts leon van aken waldo robinson, jr. **(gold star) raymond watson horace savage wade watson elizabeth shorey (r.n.) richard wallace walter shorey, jr. robert wallace eliot sidelinker bertie webber emery sidelinker harry chapman lyndon sidelinker nelson o. spencer alvah smith alvah weed w. edgar smith fredrick wymann w. earl smith robert wymann glendon spencer linwood doane gorham spencer charles young james stanchfield george campbell vietnam veterans donald annis frank jordan, jr. james archambeault robert king gerald g. bell fredrick r. lancaster william bryand george mccrum kenneth byram james mcgrath paul byram james magee james cormier stephen murray lawrence cormier john nelson, jr. victor fratello avery olmstead, iii john gilbert david olmstead rodney grant allan pendleton bruce hathaway robert russell richard jones eugene spencer roger jones hayward spencer duncan w. jordan edward stover, jr. james r. kennett galen warman robert woods deane webster james hathaway korean veterans charles call robert shorey arthur jones warner jordan erwin mclaughlin gerald w. bell donald plourde charles a. spencer george d. spencer millard spencer, jr. paul stevens leonard watson howard watson robert a. watson richard withee wade watson eugene worster frank hollis joseph king, jr. charles inman, jr. 108 present day businesses b & b distributing (school st.) this plant began operations in 1964 under roland kennett. on august 26, 1976 lawrence baker purchased the business. it employs sixteen, has a retail store, and wholesales meats and some dairy products. b & b is also the new england meat cutting school. mr.thatcher adams of bangor is the recent new owner. sweeney’s restaurant (state st.) in 1947 mrs. sweeney began operating this lunch room featuring home- cooked foods. mr. and mrs. donald rice purchased it in 1971. besides themselves they employ two others. 109 lou silver’s inc. (main rd.) lou silver acquired his business in 1950. (prior owner was r. w. naugler.) he has ten employees working for him. his equipment includes ten trucks and ten other pieces of machinery. his services are: construction work, hauling loam, sand, gravel and he also does winter plowing. johnson monumental co. (state st.) johnson monumental was originally clukey and johnson, beginning their business in 1935 in brewer. in 1948, eugene g. boynton bought the busi- ness and moved it to veazie in 1953. he was located in robert smith’s building for 15 years and has been at his present location for the last ten years. he sells cemetery monuments, headstones and lot markers, doing his own engraving. 110 tiny tot diaper service (state st.) owner philip r. veilleux began tiny tot in bangor in 1947. in 1963 he built and moved into his present location in veazie. the baby diaper serv- ice provides pick-up and delivery once a week. the plant is equipped with stainless steel machines to ensure sanitary conditions. five people are employed. h. tabenken & co. inc. (school st.) the original founders located this business in veazie in 1947. from 1957 to 1971 they have continually enlarged. employment totals thirty-five with samuel tabenken as president and chairman of the board. they are distrib- utors of beers, wines and beverages with some imports from japan and south america. 111 cardin advertising (state st.) this agency began on january 1, 1967 under the ownership of robert cardin. he employs four people plus one person half time. their services are: advertising and public relations. in 1976 mr. cardin designed veazie’s town seal. jackson boat company (state st.) willy and becky jackson moved their business to veazie in 1952. he began in a 28’ by 50’ building enlarging it in the 1970’s. their canoes are made on special order, including the 228 square stern jackson canoe which is shipped as far away as missouri. they plan to build a showroom. they sell boats, motors, trailers, canoes and marine accessories. 112 veazie elms (state st.) this rooming house began approximately thirty years ago. in 1970 or 1971 ed doucette and ken russell sold out to chuck and kathy crowe, the pres- ent owners. lodgings and friendly hospitality for their guests are offered by the crowes. ho sai guy (state st.) ho sai guy began operating in 1963 under the kam oi and charles w. wong corporation. the former thompson’s building located here had been moved so the wong corp. built their present establishment. they employ between seven and ten people, selling chinese and american food, beer, wine and liquors. 113 jordan’s gun shop (maple st.) frank jordan, sr. built and began his gunshop on july 7, 1952. he employs one part time man. he sells guns, ammunition, components and does gen- eral gunsmithing. lancaster’s market (state st.) irving lancaster built and began his store in 1948. he retired in 1973 leas- ing the store to mr. and mrs. carroll colford. they employ four part time people. 114 maine cement products co. (state st.) mecaw industries div. the plant was built in 1952 under the name of maine cement products. in 1958 the plant was purchased by mecaw industries and was enlarged. it is managed by ronald parent and employs thirty people. they sell cement products and handle building supplies serving contractors and builders in maine. blaisdell’s restaurant (state st.) atwell blaisdell built and began the restaurant on june 7, 1947. he employed seven and sold home cooked food. in the fall of 1976 he retired. (since 1964 he has run blaisdell locksmith in his home across the street from the restaurant.) recently purchased by mark rustin of old town, new name: village kitchen. 115 northern neon sign co. (main st.) business first began in 1955 under the ownership of wm. g. turner. on january 3, 1977, vernon d. dupuis became the new owner, enlarging the building in november 1977. two people are employed. they sell interior and exterior signs of all materials plus neon and lighted signs. veazie village variety (olive st.) proprietor walter d. libby purchased the business from eleanor and eugene mccaffrey in december 1977. this store is family owned and fam- ily employed. 116 r. m. flagg company (state st.) the business was incorporated in 1928 by roscoe flagg. it is owned and operated by the flagg family. flaggs moved to their present location in 1966. (building was formerly a mobil gas station run by percy alexander.) flaggs sell a complete line of food service equipment for hotels, restaurants and the home with their own parts and maintenance department. employment: twenty-three people. bill potter auto sales (state st.) william r. potter began his business on february 1, 1970 on the site where the former veazie sport and garden was located. he employs four people and he sells used cars and services them. 117 american concrete industries, inc. (stillwater ave.) the company started on nov. 3, 1919 in a gravel pit at mt. hope dealing in burial vaults, under the name of bangor automatic sealing vault co. later they moved to 1036 state st. in 1936 g. carleton snow purchased the business and in 1966 it was sold again to john and richard snow. the busi- ness moved to stillwater ave. in 1967. present manager is tim schoppe. they sell burial vaults, septic tanks, shawnee steps and miscellaneous pre- cast items. employment: thirty-eight people. dennis beverage co. (school st.) this business was established in 1908 by the dennis family and incorpo- rated in 1949. operating as a bottling plant, they sold their bottling fran- chises and moved to veazie in 1968 changing their name to the dennis beverage co. they are distributors of beer, wine and beverages. in 1972 they began a wholesale division of paper and plastics. employment: fifteen to twenty people with future expansion plans. 118 looking up olive street (1895) wyatt spencer home on right. olive street (about 1920) mrs. isabel skinner, grandmother to john skinner, sitting on porch. 119 boarding house (late 1800’s) managed by “ma” lufkin and is located at the foot of olive and oak street. present owner, george spencer, tore down the barn in the 1970’s. room and board for two men and pair of horses for one week . . . $3.25. 120 1904 william drinkwater and son ralph on lawn of old homestead, main rd. 1926 or 1927 l to r: “bunny” lancaster, walter dudley, ivan lancaster, ernest leblanc 121 consumer oil (1952 or 1953) this business ceased in 1976 when bob smith sold out to webber oil and retired l to r: joe king, sr., alvah catkins, bob smith, irving “bunny” lancaster i interrupted them while tearing down bob smih’s old home . . . 122 aerial view of veazie (1950) shows state street up through to orono. bottom of photo shows school street. gen. veazie home is 2nd house up from school street on right side of state st. 123 bibliography “history of penobscot county, maine,” 1882, william chase & co., publisher, cleveland “the penobscot boom and the development of the west branch of the penobscot river for log driving,” alfred geer hempstead university of maine studies, second series no. 18, 1931. university press, orono, maine the bangor daily commercial, various dates the bangor whig and courier, various dates city records, city of bangor, volumes 4, 5, 6, and 7 veazie town records united states census, enumerator’s reports for the town of veazie, 1860, 1870, 1880 flood insurance study (preliminary study), town of veazie, penobscot county, u. s. department of housing and urban development, federal insurance administration, june 29, 1977 greenough and company’s directory of the inhabitants, institutions, etc., in the city of bangor for 1875-1876. .greenough and co., boston cannon and company’s directory of bangor and brewer, 1901, cannon and co., bangor bangor city directory and state register, augustus c. smith, 1851, david bugbee,publisher, bangor maine register, 1972-1973 veazie, maine, comprehensive plan 1961-1981, james w. sewall co., 1960 124 125 this map is a section taken from an old map of the city of bangor at the gar museum. it was published in 1853 by s.s. smith, 17 west market square, bangor. henry f. walling, 81 washington st. boston, mass. was the civil engineer.